
[Non-isolated dynamic black and white holes]Non-isolated dynamic black
holes and white holes
M. L. McClure
mcclure@astro.utoronto.ca
Kaem Anderson
Kirk Bardahl
Mathematics & Applied Mathematics, University of Cape Town,
Rondebosch 7701, South Africa
2018/12/12 05:58:11
Modifying the Kerr-Schild transformation used to generate black and white
hole spacetimes, new dynamic black and white holes are obtained
using a time-dependent Kerr-Schild scalar field.
Physical solutions are found for black holes that shrink with time and for
white holes that expand with time.
The black hole spacetimes are physical only in the vicinity of the black
hole, with the physical region increasing in radius with time.
The white hole spacetimes are physical throughout.
Unlike the standard Schwarzschild solution the singularities are
non-isolated, since the time-dependence introduces a mass-energy
distribution.
The surfaces in the metrics where FORMULA  are dynamic, moving
inward with time for the black holes and outward for the white holes,
which leads to a question of whether these spacetimes truly have event
horizons—a problem shared with Vaidya's cosmological black hole
spacetimes.
By finding a surface that shrinks or expands at the same rate as the null
geodesics move, and within which null geodesics move inward or outward
faster than the surfaces shrink or expand respectively, it is verified
that these do in fact behave like black and white holes.
04.20.Jb, 04.40.Nr, 04.70.Bw, 97.60.Lf
Introduction
Non-isolated dynamic black holes are of interest since they are more
realistic than black holes that exist by themselves in a vacuum and
that never evolve in time.
White hole solutions are also of interest: white hole exteriors are
better representations of stars than black hole exteriors since white
holes can act as sources of radiation while black holes can only act as
sinks.
Many dynamic black hole solutions are cosmological black holes, but it
would be ideal to have solutions for black holes that are dynamic without
relying on a cosmological background to achieve this.
In this paper new non-isolated dynamic black and white holes will be
obtained via Kerr-Schild transformations {{cite:4dbc9bfe-8428-4c88-b122-66dc6f22a549}} (see also
{{cite:a97bdb41-2820-4f1b-8ba4-26a8166dcaf4}}).
A Kerr-Schild transformation
FORMULA 
can be used to generate a new metric FORMULA  by taking a known
metric FORMULA  and adding a component based on a scalar field FORMULA  and
null geodesic vector field FORMULA .
For example, the Eddington-Finkelstein form of the Schwarzschild metric
can be derived by performing a Kerr-Schild transformation on Minkowski
space, with FORMULA  and FORMULA  or FORMULA  for a
black hole or white hole respectively.
Previously Dawood and Ghosh {{cite:07096c18-c9f0-4777-a140-0f626a01341d}} found a family of dynamic black
and white holes by combining the time-dependence of Vaidya's radiating
star {{cite:35016dc8-6340-49c1-b72b-3bab1c1ae5a7}} with Salgado's {{cite:dcfef789-0593-41e9-880f-499cb1a870f1}} family of static black holes.
Cosmological black holes—such as those of McVittie {{cite:d0e00bf6-0d70-4176-9df5-6024ef27ede9}},
Vaidya {{cite:32881757-eb7c-400d-902b-081fbc72ce5a}}, Thakurta {{cite:768a9850-f3ba-4f5b-a829-7e421e710844}}, Sultana and Dyer {{cite:218de8e0-40d9-41d6-8482-cf91f270af0a}},
and McClure and Dyer {{cite:0aadfb00-f3f7-4d49-b12f-af629a19eb3d}}—also provide examples of dynamic
black holes since the black holes are surrounded by an expanding
cosmological background and evolve with the universe.
Swiss cheese black holes {{cite:12960eae-05b3-4bcb-aec9-881f8048fb4b}} can also be surrounded by a
cosmological background; however, they possess a vacuum region between the
black hole and the surrounding FLRW universe, and the black holes
themselves are not dynamic.
Cosmological black hole spacetimes are generally obtained either by
performing the same conformal transformation on the Schwarzschild
spacetime as is used to transform Minkowski space to FLRW, or by
performing the same Kerr-Schild transformation on FLRW as is used to
transform Minkowski space to Schwarzschild.
The essential difference between the two methods is whether the Kerr-Schild
scalar field contains the cosmological scale factor FORMULA .
This suggests another possible scenario—one in which the seed metric is
Minkowski but the Kerr-Schild scalar field contains a scale factor
FORMULA , which is the scenario that will be explored in this paper.
This type of spacetime could lead to solutions of dynamic black and white
holes in an asymptotically-Minkowski background, rather than in a
cosmological background.
New solutions of Einstein's field equations will be found with this
spacetime in Section II.
The Einstein tensors will be calculated using the computer algebra
program REDUCE 3.8 with the Redten 4.3 package {{cite:dc577faf-9144-415e-8436-205febd28c02}}.
Ashtekar and Krishnan {{cite:3cbd5ae9-4333-440c-a6e9-b3d6e7839d75}} give a detailed review of the
various definitions used to describe the horizons of dynamic black holes.
Commonly black holes and white holes are specified by future and past
event horizons respectively, but for dynamic spacetimes these horizons
will generally not correspond with the apparent horizons that track the
surfaces that locally behave like the black and white hole boundaries at
a moment in time.
Event horizons are defined using boundaries of the
causal past of future null infinity and causal future of past null
infinity respectively, but it is more practical to look at trapped
surfaces.
On a trapped surface the outward-directed null geodesics converge such
that the volume they occupy is decreasing in time, and on a
marginally trapped surface their volume expansion is zero.
The boundary of the total trapped region is used to specify an apparent
horizon or marginally trapped surface that locally acts like the
boundary of a black hole at a moment in time.
Hayward {{cite:e953e800-2d15-4cb8-a713-3be91e5bad9f}} defines a trapping horizon in terms of marginally
trapped surfaces such that it is essentially the time evolution of an
apparent horizon.
In general, the expansion of the event horizon may be positive, since the
area may be increasing, in which case it is not necessary that the event
horizon coincides with the apparent horizon, or that any trapped surfaces
even exist within the event horizon at a given moment of time
(see Wald and Iyer {{cite:fb24222f-da6a-44d7-b788-398b0009a57f}}).
During black hole collapses, it is expected that as mass is accreted the
apparent horizon forms and moves outwards, eventually approaching the
event horizon.
For instance, Schnetter and Krishnan {{cite:27e44af3-3eed-414c-ba83-0c35b3f07b1f}} show that the black
hole version of Vaidya's radiating star (a radiation sink) has an event
horizon outside the FORMULA  apparent horizon, such that the apparent
horizon asymptotically approaches the event horizon as FORMULA  increases.
It is generally assumed that an apparent horizon cannot exist outside of
an event horizon.
However, a region that is trapped or marginally trapped could subsequently
cease to be, since these definitions only specify what a surface is doing
at a specific moment in time.
In special circumstances, an apparent horizon could move inward and an
event horizon could only exist if there is an inner region that remains
trapped for all time.
For instance, if a conformal transformation is performed to shrink
the Schwarzschild spacetime, this could lead to photons becoming trapped
outside the event horizon (which remains at FORMULA  under conformal
transformation) since the contraction of the space influences the volume
expansion of photons within it.
Assuming the rate at which the space shrinks is decreasing, then regions
that are trapped due to this negative volume expansion would subsequently
cease to be, such that the apparent horizon moves inward and ultimately
coincides with the event horizon.
Thus, with a non-isolated black hole where the gravitational contraction of
matter is creating a negative volume expansion, it is possible for an event
horizon to exist within an apparent horizon.
If an apparent horizon is shrinking, ultimately it is not a very satisfying
demonstration of the existence of a black hole: unless there is an inner
region that remains trapped for all time, then the trapped region
will shrink to nothing and allow all outgoing null geodesics to
eventually escape.
In the case of the new dynamic solutions in this paper, FORMULA  at
FORMULA , so that the null geodesics remain at fixed areal radius FORMULA  while
this surface is itself shrinking or expanding in FORMULA  with time according to
the scale factor FORMULA .
Thus, for shrinking black holes photons may escape the FORMULA  surface,
and for expanding white holes photons may become enveloped within the surface,
meaning the FORMULA  surface cannot act as an event horizon.
If these are indeed black holes and white holes, there should be a surface
contained within the FORMULA  surface where photons are held fixed
relative to the surface as it shrinks or expands, and within which
photons move inward or outward faster than surfaces shrink or expand for
the black holes and white holes respectively.
These surfaces will be found in Section III.
Vaidya's cosmological black holes {{cite:32881757-eb7c-400d-902b-081fbc72ce5a}} can be expressed as
FORMULA 
for black holes in asymptotically-flat universes.
Vaidya's cosmological black holes also have the problem that the
FORMULA  surface shrinks while null geodesics are held at fixed FORMULA 
at that surface, allowing photons to escape this surface.
Vaidya claimed this surface is an event horizon by first
performing the calculation for the case of a black hole in a static
Einstein universe and then extending it to the case of an expanding
universe, but this surface can no longer serve as an event
horizon once it becomes dynamic.
(Also, since Vaidya considered the cases of closed universes, it is not strictly
possible to satisfy the definition of an event horizon in such universes.)
In Section III it will be shown that the new dynamic black hole spacetimes
are conformal to Vaidya's cosmological black holes in asymptotically-flat
universes, so if event horizons exist for the new dynamic black holes
then they must exist for these cosmological black holes as well.
Finally, in Section IV the mass of the new black and white holes will be
allowed to vary across null surfaces analogous to Vaidya's radiating star
{{cite:35016dc8-6340-49c1-b72b-3bab1c1ae5a7}}.
Interpretations will be given for non-isolated dynamic black holes and
white holes with a perfect fluid component and an additional null-fluid
component.

New dynamic black hole and white hole solutions
Performing a Kerr-Schild transformation of Minkowski space with a
scale factor FORMULA  modifying the usual scalar field used to obtain the
Schwarzschild metric, the new line element
FORMULA 
is obtained (with the plus or minus signs corresponding to the black
or white hole cases respectively).
Looking at the Einstein tensor (with FORMULA ), the only
non-zero components are
FORMULA 
Assuming there is a perfect fluid component in the energy-momentum tensor,
then the energy density FORMULA  and pressure FORMULA  are related by
FORMULA 
since FORMULA  for any additional null fluid or heat conduction
component that might be present in the energy-momentum tensor.
From spherical symmetry FORMULA , so
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
For the new spacetimes to yield a valid physical solution of Einstein's
field equations, the energy conditions (e.g. see {{cite:c2d7e471-ad84-40a7-9c6f-32e50b2f7576}}) must be
satisfied.
With a perfect fluid this essentially requires that FORMULA  and FORMULA  (weak
energy condition), FORMULA  and FORMULA  (strong energy
condition), and FORMULA  (dominant energy condition).
In the black hole case, in order for the energy density to be non-negative
everywhere, both FORMULA  and FORMULA  must be non-positive;
however, this is not possible for any FORMULA .
Looking for a solution in a region of spacetime (with one term of the
energy density positive and dominating the negative term) requires the
pressure to be negative; otherwise, the positive term of the energy
density would be the same as the pressure term, and the negative term in
the energy density would cause the pressure to be of greater magnitude
than the energy density, violating the dominant energy condition.
Thus, FORMULA  must be negative, which requires FORMULA  with FORMULA , such that the black holes shrink with time.
The positive term of the energy density goes as FORMULA  relative to the
negative term, so the energy density is positive and all the energy
conditions are satisfied for sufficiently small values of FORMULA , and with
the radius of the physical region increasing with FORMULA .
This is beneficial since the solution is valid in the vicinity of the
black hole singularity, so the unphysical region of the spacetime can
simply be ignored or potentially replaced using a spacetime matching.
In the white hole case, the energy density is non-negative
everywhere if
FORMULA  is non-negative and FORMULA  is non-positive, which
requires FORMULA  with FORMULA , such that the white holes
expand with time.
With these conditions, FORMULA  and FORMULA , so all the energy
conditions are obeyed throughout the spacetime.
The pressure is zero when FORMULA , so this is the
case of pressureless dust.
The FORMULA  and FORMULA  terms are heat conduction terms, which can arise
from a null fluid or from energy conduction, either due to the transfer of
heat through the matter or a non-comoving velocity field that leads
to a flux of matter relative to the co-ordinates.
The null vector field is FORMULA , so a null fluid energy-momentum component
FORMULA  would lead to terms of equivalent magnitude (different
signs) in FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA , and FORMULA ; however, FORMULA .
Since FORMULA  and
FORMULA 
while
FORMULA 
then there must be a radial velocity field component.
Thus, the heat conduction terms should be interpreted as the flux
of matter relative to the co-ordinates with FORMULA .

Finding the horizons
The new solutions of Section II are non-stationary.
In the case of Schwarzschild, FORMULA  at FORMULA ;
however, the FORMULA  surface for the new solutions is at
FORMULA , so as FORMULA  shrinks or grows with time, that surface moves
to smaller or larger FORMULA .
With the Schwarzschild metric, the surface FORMULA  is
a null surface where null geodesics obey FORMULA , so
photons at FORMULA  are held fixed there such that outgoing photons cannot
move outside the surface in the case of a black hole and ingoing photons
cannot move inside the surface in the case of a white hole.
With the new dynamic black and white holes it is also true that
null geodesics obey FORMULA  at the surface
FORMULA .
However, the surface cannot be the event horizon of the dynamic black
and white holes,
since photons at that surface are held at fixed FORMULA  while the surface
FORMULA  shrinks or expands, allowing outgoing photons to escape in
the black hole case or ingoing photons to become enveloped in the white
hole case.
If the Kerr-Schild transformation is performed using the geodesic null
vector field FORMULA  instead of FORMULA ,
the spacetime is identical, and FORMULA  can be used to represent the ingoing
null geodesics of the black holes or outgoing null geodesics of the white
holes.
Since this geodesic null vector field is preserved under Kerr-Schild
transformation, the expansion of these geodesics is the same as in Minkowski
space and the divergence is given by
FORMULA 
such that the ingoing null geodesics of the black holes are always converging
and outgoing null geodesics of the white holes are always diverging as expected.
The null vector field representing the opposite-directed null geodesics is
FORMULA  (normalized such that FORMULA ), and it is
not preserved under the Kerr-Schild transformation since
FORMULA 
The outgoing null geodesics of the black holes and ingoing null geodesics of
the white holes can be represented as
FORMULA 
such that the outgoing null geodesics of the black holes and ingoing null
geodesics of the white holes have divergence
FORMULA 
Thus, unlike the static FORMULA  case, the marginal surfaces are not simply at
FORMULA .
Since FORMULA  is negative for the black holes and positive for the white holes,
then at FORMULA  the expansion is negative for the black holes and positive for the
white holes such that the apparent horizon exists outside FORMULA  at
FORMULA 
The expansion of the outgoing null geodesics of the black holes switches
from negative inside this surface to positive outside, and the expansion
of the ingoing null geodesics of the white holes switches from negative
outside this surface to positive inside.
Since FORMULA  varies inversely with FORMULA  compared with FORMULA , then regions
that are trapped in the black hole case (or anti-trapped in the white hole case)
cease to be and the apparent horizon moves inward, asymptotically approaching
FORMULA  with time.
It may seem counterintuitive that the apparent horizon is not simply
the FORMULA  surface where the outgoing null geodesics of the
black holes and ingoing geodesics of the white holes are instantaneously held
at fixed areal radius FORMULA .
However, using the volume element, the co-ordinate volume expansion for a
spherical shell of infinitesimal thickness is
FORMULA 
so even when the null geodesics are held at fixed areal radius for an instant,
they are generally converging in the black hole case and diverging in the
white hole case due to the volume expansion of the space.
Unlike typical cases of black hole collapses where the trapped region grows
and is contained within an event horizon, since the trapped region is decreasing
an event horizon can only exist inside the apparent horizon.
Since photons can escape the FORMULA  surface as it moves inward in the black
hole case, or photons can enter the surface is it expands and envelops them in the
white hole case, this surface cannot generally be the event horizon, and
the event horizon can only asymptote towards it from within.
The black hole area law also requires that the event horizon
not move to smaller areal radius FORMULA : since the FORMULA  surface shrinks
to smaller FORMULA  for the dynamic black holes, the only way the event horizon can
asymptote to it at infinite time is by expanding outward to reach it as a
fraction of FORMULA .
Thus, the aim is to find a surface specified by FORMULA 
(where FORMULA  can vary with time) that shrinks or expands at the same rate as
the null geodesics at that surface,
and such that within it the null geodesics can only move inward or outward
relative to the shrinking or expanding surfaces in the black hole and white
hole cases respectively.
It is possible that satisfying this local requirement may somehow differ from
studying the causal structure of the complete spacetime, but
it is the most reasonable local description that should be equivalent to the
existence of an event horizon by the usual definition.
The goal is to verify that the spacetimes behave like black and white holes
are qualitatively expected to, rather than strictly showing that they satisfy
the usual definition of an event horizon, since the time dependence of the
Kerr-Schild scalar field makes it difficult to produce conformal diagrams of
the spacetimes.
Ignoring the angular components of the line element and looking at where
it is null yields
FORMULA 
The rate at which a surface specified by FORMULA  moves radially is
given by
FORMULA 
so equating the rates for the motion of the surface and the motion of
null geodesics yields
FORMULA 
Since FORMULA  is negative for the black hole case and positive for the
white hole case, then in both cases
FORMULA 
Since FORMULA  is non-positive for the black and white hole
solutions, time increases as a function of FORMULA .
In figure REF , a plot of FORMULA  appears.
It is apparent that FORMULA  at FORMULA , which corresponds to FORMULA .
As FORMULA  approaches infinity, FORMULA  approaches 1, which corresponds to
FORMULA .
Thus, the surface that shrinks or
expands at the same rate as the null geodesics move
is actually moving outward as a fraction of FORMULA  with time, while the
surface FORMULA  shrinks or expands with time.
FIGURE 
To determine whether this surface behaves like an event horizon,
rather than merely temporarily following the null geodesics,
it is necessary to study what happens to null geodesics within it.
Looking at how the FORMULA  rates are affected going to
smaller FORMULA  (larger FORMULA ) at a given moment in time,
FORMULA 
for the null geodesics and
FORMULA 
for the surfaces.
The null geodesics move inward or outward faster at smaller FORMULA  for
the black holes and white holes respectively, while
since FORMULA  is negative for the black holes and positive for the
white holes, the surfaces move inward or outward slower at smaller FORMULA .
Thus, within the surface that is shrinking or expanding at the same rate
as the null geodesics move, photons must move inward or outward faster
than the interior surfaces move, forcing photons to move toward the black
hole singularity or toward the white hole surface.
Since the null geodesics within the surface move inward and
are trapped for all time in the black hole case, the surface appears
to act as a future event horizon.
Since the null geodesics within the surface move outward toward the
surface in the white hole case, no
ingoing photons are able to cross the surface and then move inward,
so the surface appears to act as a past event horizon.
In the case of Vaidya's cosmological black holes {{cite:32881757-eb7c-400d-902b-081fbc72ce5a}},
repeating the above analysis to try to locate the event horizon
yields an identical result.
The reason can be seen most directly by the fact that Vaidya's
cosmological black hole spacetime is conformally related to the new
dynamic black holes.
Performing a conformal transformation of Vaidya's cosmological black
holes to cancel out the scale factor in the seed part of the
metric yields
FORMULA 
which looks exactly like the metric for the dynamic black holes, except
that the scale factor is in the denominator of the Kerr-Schild term
instead of the numerator.
However, the scale factor for Vaidya's cosmological black holes
grows with time so that FORMULA  with FORMULA ,
whereas the dynamic black holes have FORMULA  with FORMULA , so
in fact the metrics are the same.
Thus, the metrics are conformally related, and since conformal
transformations preserve causal structure, Vaidya's cosmological
black holes must share any event horizon that the dynamic black
holes possess.
It should be noted that expansion is not generally conserved under a
conformal transformation, so the expansion of the outgoing null geodesics
will differ from that of the new dynamic black holes and be given by
FORMULA 
Thus, for expanding universes, the expansion will be positive at the
FORMULA  surface, so the marginal surfaces representing the apparent
horizon will actually be inside the FORMULA  surface,
unlike for the new solutions presented in this paper.

Two-Fluid Solutions
Performing a Kerr-Schild transformation of Minkowski space with a
scale factor FORMULA  modifying the usual scalar field used to obtain the
Schwarzschild metric and with FORMULA  (where FORMULA ) as with Vaidya's
radiating stellar exterior, the new line element
FORMULA 
is obtained (with the plus or minus signs corresponding to the black
or white hole cases respectively).
Looking at the Einstein tensor, the only
non-zero components are
FORMULA 
where FORMULA .
Comparing with the case of Section II where FORMULA ,
it is apparent there are now FORMULA  terms in FORMULA , FORMULA ,
FORMULA , and FORMULA  that can be interpreted as a null fluid component
since the FORMULA  and FORMULA  terms sum to zero, and the FORMULA  and FORMULA 
terms represent heat conduction from the transport of energy as the null
fluid radially transfers energy.
Thus, this interpretation results in a two-fluid solution consisting of the
perfect fluid found in Section II combined with a null fluid
analogous to that of Vaidya's radiating stellar exterior.
In the case of the black hole the null fluid must be ingoing such that the
singularity accretes mass, and in the case of the white hole the null
fluid must be outgoing such that the singularity radiates away mass.
Since the additional fluid component is a null fluid, it must satisfy the
energy conditions, so in combination with the perfect
fluid component, the solutions should be physical under the same
conditions as they are in Section II.

Discussion and summary
Solutions for new non-isolated dynamic black and white holes have been
found.
The solutions consist of a perfect fluid that is contracting in the black
hole case and expanding in the white hole case, and if the mass of the
singularity is allowed to vary across null surfaces there is an
additional null fluid component that is accreted by the black hole or
radiated by the white hole.
These exact solutions could serve as simple models of black holes, white
holes, and stellar exteriors with surrounding matter distributions of
non-cosmological nature.
While the black hole solutions are only physical within the neighbourhood
of the singularity, it is possible to match spacetimes together using
junction conditions, so it is possible these solutions could
be matched onto another spacetime to make the solution physical throughout.
It is interesting that while having FORMULA  times a function of time in the
metric looks analogous to Vaidya's radiating star {{cite:35016dc8-6340-49c1-b72b-3bab1c1ae5a7}} or Dawood
and Ghosh's dynamic black holes {{cite:07096c18-c9f0-4777-a140-0f626a01341d}} since they both have the mass
varying as a function of time, the new dynamic solutions do not merely
yield a null fluid like the radiating star.
This can be explained by the fact that the previous spacetimes have FORMULA  as a
function of FORMULA  , so that FORMULA  is
varying between null surfaces, whereas the new dynamic black holes
have FORMULA  being scaled by the scale factor between different spacelike
surfaces. The previous spacetimes are consistent with mass being radiated
away from a white hole or onto a black hole, whereas the
new dynamic black holes require a different form of mass-energy.
Incorporating a scale factor in the Kerr-Schild
term of the Schwarzschild metric has a similar effect to performing a
conformal transformation of Minkowski space in that it introduces
mass-energy.
A conformal transformation of Minkowski space introduces mass-energy
since the gravitational influence causes a decelerating expansion of
space (or equivalently an accelerating shrinking of space as the matter
falls together backwards in time).
Thus, it makes sense that introducing a scale factor in the Kerr-Schild term
of the Schwarzschild metric also leads to the introduction of mass-energy,
and it makes sense that this would be inhomogeneous due to the FORMULA 
dependence of the scalar field.
Presumably the reason the white holes are limited from expanding faster than
FORMULA  is that faster expansions would lead to an acceleration, rather
than a deceleration, in the expansion, which would not be consistent with
gravitational attraction of mass-energy.
Since the black holes are shrinking, presumably there should be no problem
with the mass-energy distribution accelerating together, which would explain
why they can shrink at any rate, with increasing energy density corresponding
to a faster decrease in FORMULA .
While the new solutions are spherically symmetric, the presence of
pressure means they are not examples of Lemaître-Tolman-Bondi
solutions {{cite:bffec842-409e-4ad5-a19d-04acc46700ef}}, {{cite:281faf9b-2415-4131-9b40-960a6f07231b}}, {{cite:84201fda-60c5-4123-9a89-cd5033d26f46}}.
The pressure gradients will exert a force to accelerate the matter.
The pressure goes as FORMULA , so the pressure gradient is exerting an
inward force in the black hole case and an outward force in the white
hole case, meaning the matter will be accelerated toward the black hole and
away from the white hole.
Since the matter is being accelerated away from the white hole,
it suggests pressure gradients may be one way to prevent white holes from
being unstable to recollapsing to form black holes as Eardley has
suggested they would {{cite:e505585a-9977-4729-96b2-8881b3b91134}}.
It is interesting that neither the apparent horizon nor the event horizon
seems to coincide with the FORMULA  surface of the dynamic black and
white holes, yet both asymptote towards it at infinite time.
Due to the decreasing magnitude of the volume expansion of the space, regions
that are trapped or anti-trapped cease to be, so the apparent horizon
asymptotically moves inward toward the FORMULA  surface.
Contrary to usual situations where black holes accrete mass and the apparent
horizon grows to reach an event horizon from within, the apparent horizon
cannot be contained within an event horizon.
Based on the behaviour of the null geodesics, it appears that there is an
event horizon that prevents null geodesics from escaping the black hole or
entering the white hole, and this horizon asymptotes to the FORMULA  surface
from within it.
While it was claimed the FORMULA  surface of Vaidya's
cosmological black holes {{cite:32881757-eb7c-400d-902b-081fbc72ce5a}} is an event horizon, this cannot
generally be so.
It has been demonstrated that Vaidya's cosmological black holes have the
same causal structure as the new dynamic black holes found in this paper,
and likewise there is a surface within the FORMULA  surface
that traps photons for all time, verifying that these cosmological black
holes do in fact behave as black holes.
Thanks go to Charles Dyer, Charles Hellaby, and
Amanda Peet (the string theorist, not the actress) for useful
discussions and comments.
This research was funded by the NRF of South Africa.
