

A new approach to quantum measurement problem: cluster
separability

P. Hájíček
Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of
Bern
Sidlerstrasse 5, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
hajicek@itp.unibe.ch

March 2011
Based on the talk at
Fifth International Workshop DICE2010,
Castiglioncello (Tuscany), September 13–17, 2010

PACS number: 03.65.Ta

The paper describes a solution to the problem of quantum
measurement that has been proposed recently. The literal understanding of the
basic rule of quantum mechanics on identical particles violates the cluster
separation principle and so leads to difficulties. A proposal due to Peres of
how such difficulties could be removed is reformulated and extended. Cluster
separability leads to a locality requirement on observables and to the key
notion of separation status. Separation status of a microsystem is shown to
change in preparation and registration processes. The indispensability of
detectors plays an important role. Changes of separation status are
alterations of kinematic description rather than some parts of dynamical
trajectories and so more radical than 'collapse of the wave
function'. Textbook quantum mechanics does not provide any information of how
separation status changes run, hence new rules must be formulated. This
enables to satisfy the objectification requirement for registrations. To show
how the ideas work, a simplified model of registration apparatus is
constructed.
Introduction
It is well known that the state of quantum theory of
measurement is unsatisfactory. Let us mention just the excellent book
{{cite:320611fb-bd5c-48e3-a9c5-bf5f44a9ed2a}} and more recent clearly written critical review {{cite:8f31a7a9-6a40-44c5-b784-a8108d1c45e3}}.
In a series of papers {{cite:7691560f-0656-4b01-907d-456327d0d7ab}}, {{cite:dfd036b8-18d9-4ce6-b959-c0064234a761}}, {{cite:f88eb839-ef91-4aa1-82e4-0fa1bc4c1a46}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}, we looked for
solutions of three interrelated problems of quantum mechanics, those of
measurement, of classical properties and of realist interpretation. The three
main ideas that we proposed were very different from what had ever been
published and it seems that we have been successful.
All previous attempts to formulate a realist interpretation of quantum
mechanics failed because everybody was looking for objective properties where
they could not be found, namely among values of observables. Quantum
observables are not objective, see e.g. {{cite:320611fb-bd5c-48e3-a9c5-bf5f44a9ed2a}}. Their values can be
obtained only after an interaction of a quantum system with a registration
apparatus and so they are properties of a composite: microsystem +
macrosystem, and not of the microsystem alone.
Hence, we have rejected all these attempts and proposed (an extended
discussion is given in {{cite:7691560f-0656-4b01-907d-456327d0d7ab}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}) instead the following:
 Basic ontological hypothesis of quantum mechanics A
property is objective if its value is uniquely determined by a preparation
according to the rules of standard quantum mechanics. The 'value' is the value
of the mathematical expression that describes the property and it may be more
general than just a real number. No registration is necessary to establish
such a property but a correct registration cannot disprove its value; in many
cases, registrations can confirm the value.

Our interpretation of quantum mechanics differs further from Copenhagen
interpretation by assuming the universality of quantum mechanics: all physical
systems are quantum systems. Thus, classical systems are only a special kind
of quantum systems. Our theory of classical properties is given in
{{cite:dfd036b8-18d9-4ce6-b959-c0064234a761}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}. It is based on the principle of maximum entropy rather
than on the popular but incorrect ideas about coherent states. For example, we
have introduced quantum states called maximum-entropy packets and shown them
to match trajectories of classical mechanics better than Gaussian wave
packets.
The present paper contains only a simplified version of some selected points
concerning the problem of measurement.

Identical particles
We have to start with the standard theory of
identical particles. The basic rule is:
Rule 1 Let system FORMULA  consists of FORMULA  particles of the same
type, each particle having Hilbert space FORMULA . Then, the Hilbert
space of FORMULA  is the symmetrised tensor product of FORMULA  copies of
FORMULA , FORMULA , for bosons and the anti-symmetrised one,
FORMULA , for fermions. States and observables of FORMULA  are
then described by operators on the respective Hilbert space FORMULA 
or FORMULA .

It is known that the literal understanding of Rule 1 leads to
problems (see e.g. {{cite:85ae0f37-3653-4c51-9f0f-b9b41b7e969e}} p 128). To explain the problems, let us
consider two experiments.

Experiment I: State FORMULA  of
particle FORMULA  is prepared in our laboratory.

Experiment II: State FORMULA  is
prepared as in Experiment I and state FORMULA  of particle FORMULA  of the same type is prepared simultaneously in a remote laboratory.

Now, our laboratory claims: the state of
FORMULA  is FORMULA  because this has been prepared according
to all rules of experimental art. An adherent of Rule 1 who knows about both
laboratories will, however, claim: the true preparation is a combination of
the two sub-preparations, one in each laboratory, and the state is
FORMULA 
as Rule 1 requires.
Thus, it seems that the notions of preparation and of state are ambiguous. In
fact, Rule 1 requires to work with the state of all particles of the
same type in the universe and the uncertainty is much higher than that in the
above example.
Has this ambiguity any observable consequences? To answer this question, let
us first consider Experiment I supplemented by a registration corresponding to
the observable of FORMULA  with kernel FORMULA , and
let the registration be made in our laboratory. Measurements of this kind lead
to average value
FORMULA 
Second, perform Experiment II supplemented by the same
registration in our laboratory as above. The correct observable corresponding
to this registration, as required by Rule 1, now is:
FORMULA 
Such measurements lead to the average value defined by Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ):
FORMULA 
Expressions (REF ) and (REF ) differ by a term
that is equal to the average of observable FORMULA  in state
FORMULA . Hence, measurements on FORMULA  are in general disturbed by
other identical systems.

Cluster separability
Cluster separability principle is a kind of
locality assumption that has been fruitful in several branches of quantum
physics, see e.g. {{cite:8c279c3c-49fb-4dab-b76b-db2e36ebae68}} and Chap. 4 of {{cite:85bdd6a8-e8e1-433f-bc6c-ce72b11a3f8f}}. An application
of the principle to identical particles can be found for instance in
{{cite:85ae0f37-3653-4c51-9f0f-b9b41b7e969e}} p 128. We formulate it as follows:

Cluster Separability Principle No quantum
experiment with a system in a local laboratory is affected by the mere
presence of an identical system in remote parts of the universe.

Peres also observed that the principle was in
general violated by results similar to those of the previous section, and he
suggested a solution. This solution will now be reformulated and extended.
We introduce an important locality property of observables (for generalisation
to composite systems, see {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}):
Definition 1 Let FORMULA  be open. Operator with kernel
FORMULA  is FORMULA -local if
FORMULA 
for any test function FORMULA  that vanishes in FORMULA .

Now assume for Experiment II that

our laboratory is inside open set FORMULA ,

FORMULA .

Then, clearly the second term in (REF ) vanishes for
FORMULA -local observables and Eqs. (REF ) and (REF ) agree in this
case (for a more general theorem see {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}). This suggests our
strategy. In fact, what we shall do will formalise and explain the common
practice that serenely ignores all unknown identical systems and that is
intuitive, irrational but successful.

We introduce the key notion of our theory:
Definition 2 Let FORMULA  be a particle and FORMULA  an
open set satisfying the conditions:

Registrations of any FORMULA -local observable FORMULA  of FORMULA  lead to average FORMULA 
for all states FORMULA  of FORMULA .

FORMULA  is prepared in state FORMULA  such that
supp FORMULA .

In such a case, we say that FORMULA  has
separation status FORMULA .

(For generalisation to composite systems and non-vector states, see
{{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}.) Thus, the registration is not disturbed by other states of
identical systems. This can be the case e.g. if wave functions of all other
identical systems vanish in FORMULA .

We assume: Any preparation of FORMULA  must give it a non-trivial
separation status FORMULA . Then FORMULA -local observables are
individually registrable on FORMULA  but only these are if
FORMULA  has not separation status FORMULA  such that FORMULA  is a proper subset
of FORMULA . Indeed, registration of observables that are not FORMULA -local are then
disturbed by other identical systems. Now, Peres did not warn that standard
observables of quantum mechanics (position, momentum, energy, angular
momentum, spin...) were not FORMULA -local with FORMULA .
This problem can be removed by a construction of FORMULA -local observables that
are registered in real experiments and that resemble, in certain sense, the
standard ones {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}.

We list the cases in which Rule 1 does not hold:
Rule 2 Let system FORMULA  be prepared in a state described by state
operator FORMULA  so that it has separation status FORMULA . Then its state is FORMULA  and its observables form algebra
FORMULA  of all FORMULA -local observables of FORMULA .

Composition of such states and observables satisfy
Rule 3 Let systems FORMULA  and FORMULA  be prepared in
states FORMULA  and FORMULA  with separation statuses FORMULA  and
FORMULA , respectively. Then system FORMULA  has state
FORMULA  and the algebra of its observables is
FORMULA .

Clearly, the preparation described in Rule 3 is a preparation of
FORMULA  in state FORMULA  with separation status FORMULA  only if FORMULA .

Now, cluster separability holds.

Preparations and registrations
As usual, we assume that any
measurement on microsystems can be divided into a preparation and a
registration procedure. The preparation determines a state and the
registration gives a value of an observable. What do the above ideas imply for
preparation and registration?
As we have seen in point 2 of our strategy, any preparation must transfer
system FORMULA  from a trivial into a non-trivial separation
status. Thus, the separation status changes during a preparation. What is the
relation of registrations to separation status change?
An important assumption of our theory of measurement is:
Rule 4 Any registration apparatus for microsystems must
contain at least one detector and every 'reading of a pointer value' (see
e.g. {{cite:320611fb-bd5c-48e3-a9c5-bf5f44a9ed2a}}) is a signal from a detector.

Hence, during registration, system must enter the sensitive matter of
a detector. In this way, its non-trivial separation status changes into a
trivial one. More discussion of this important point is given in
{{cite:f88eb839-ef91-4aa1-82e4-0fa1bc4c1a46}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}.
Let us give an example of separation status change. Let the states in Rule 3
be vector states of identical particles,
FORMULA 
Then the state of FORMULA  is
FORMULA 
Let the time evolution leads to FORMULA  entering FORMULA 
and FORMULA  having separation status FORMULA . Then the
state of FORMULA  will be
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  denotes symmetrisation or
anti-symmetrisation of FORMULA  arguments and FORMULA  is the
projection to the unit sphere. The map
FORMULA 
is a non-invertible and non-linear map between two different Hilbert
spaces. Second, in state (REF ), the observables that are registrable
on FORMULA  form the algebra FORMULA . In state
(REF ), the algebra would be FORMULA : there are no observables that would be registrable individually on
FORMULA . Thus, the set of observables changes from FORMULA  to FORMULA .
In classical mechanics, the possible states of system FORMULA  are all
positive normalised functions (distribution functions) on the phase space
FORMULA  and possible observables are all real function on FORMULA 
(at least, all such observables have definite averages on FORMULA 
independently of external circumstances). FORMULA  is fixed and uniquely
associated with the system alone and forms the basis of this kinematic
description. Hence, transitions between different sets of observables similar
to those described above would be impossible in classical mechanics. They are
only enabled in quantum mechanics by the non-objective character of
observables: not only their values cannot be ascribed to microsystem
FORMULA  alone but some of them are not even registrable in principle
due to external conditions in which FORMULA  is.
We assume that the quantum kinematics of a microsystem is defined
mathematically by the possible states represented by all positive normalised
(trace one) operators, and possible observables represented by some
self-adjoint operators, on the Hilbert space associated with the system. Then
the transitions of states and observables that go with changes of separation
status cannot be viewed as a part of a dynamical trajectory due to some new
version of the dynamics of FORMULA , but as a change of its kinematic
description. Thus, although the change of separation status is similar to the
collapse of the wave function (the non-local character included), it is both
more radical and better understood.
What has been said up to now shows that textbook quantum mechanics is
incomplete in the following sense:

It accepts and knows only two separation statuses:

that of isolated systems, FORMULA , with the standard
operators as observables, and

that of a member of a system of identical particles, FORMULA ,
with no registrable observables of its own.


It provides no rules for changes of separation status.

Our main idea is: Quantum mechanics must be supplemented by a
theory of general separation status and by new rules that govern processes in
which separation status changes. The new rules must not contradict the rest of
quantum mechanics and ought to agree with and explain observational facts.

Extended understanding of separation status
Definition 2 leaves open
the question of what the nature of disturbances is that might prevent
registrations on FORMULA . As yet, all examples of such a disturbance
had to do with entanglement of identical particles. In the light of Rule 4,
the absence of such entanglement need not be sufficient for FORMULA  to
allow undisturbed registrations. To explain that, it is helpful to distinguish
two kinds of registration.
A direct registration first manipulates FORMULA  by classical
fields and shields so that the prepared beam is split into spatially separated
beams, each of which associated with one eigenvalue of the registered
observable. Then, there is a set of detectors each of which can be hit by only
one beam. Hence, FORMULA  must be separated from other microsystems, not
only of the same type, so hat it is FORMULA  that is available to those
manipulation by fields and shields and has sufficient kinetic energy to excite
a detector.
An indirect registration, such as scattering or QND measurement (see
e.g. {{cite:8694e41b-df04-4fd4-9c18-29bf4e88a6dc}} and {{cite:85ae0f37-3653-4c51-9f0f-b9b41b7e969e}} p 400), lets FORMULA  interact with
another microsystem FORMULA  and it is only FORMULA  that is
then subject to a direct registration. For the measurement to be QND, several
further conditions must be satisfied, but this does not concern us here. After
a QND procedure, FORMULA  remains available to another one: another
system FORMULA  of the same type as FORMULA  interacts with
FORMULA  and is then directly registered etc. Information given by the
detectors of the direct registrations reveals also something about FORMULA . Thus, detectors are necessary for indirect registrations, too, and
FORMULA  must be suitably separated from other microsystems, not only of
the same type, so that we can be sure that it was FORMULA  that
interacted with FORMULA , FORMULA  etc.
There are interesting consequences for macroscopic systems. In general, a
macroscopic system FORMULA  contains very many different
particles. Consider the observable with kernel FORMULA  that
concerns particle FORMULA  of FORMULA . Suppose that there would
be an apparatus FORMULA  associated with registration of
FORMULA  on FORMULA , if FORMULA  were prepared
individually. Then, the apparatus FORMULA  cannot be applied to
FORMULA  to register FORMULA  because FORMULA  is
not suitably separated.
For example, in a direct registration, readings of FORMULA  are signals
of a detector that registers FORMULA  and FORMULA  must be
isolated to be manipulable, have sufficient kinetic energy, etc. Hence, to
register FORMULA , we need a method that makes measurements
directly on FORMULA  and which is, therefore, different from apparatus
FORMULA .
Consider a scattering as an example of indirect registration. Let FORMULA  be a crystal. By scattering FORMULA -rays off it, relative positions of its
ions can be recognised. But rather than a position of an individual ion it is
a space dependence of the average density due to all ions. In general,
scattering of a microsystem FORMULA  off a macrosystem FORMULA 
can be determined in terms of potential FORMULA  that
describes the interaction between FORMULA  and FORMULA -th microscopic
subsystem FORMULA  of FORMULA  so that the whole interaction
Hamiltonian is the sum
FORMULA 
Hence, the scattering yields only information on a sum of over all subsystems
FORMULA  of FORMULA  that can interact with FORMULA  and
FORMULA 's need not be identical with FORMULA . Although
ingenious potentials can be invented, nature provides only a small number of
potentials.
Another example is the kinetic energy of FORMULA . Again, this
observable cannot be measured by the method kinetic energy is measured on
individual systems of type FORMULA  (proportional counter, scattering
off a crystal, etc.). In the case that FORMULA  is in a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium, the average kinetic energy can be calculated from
the temperature. Hence, a viable method to measure the average is to measure
the temperature of FORMULA . Again, this is a special case that works
only under specific conditions. Further examples could be other additive
quantities, such as momentum and angular momentum. Average total values of
these quantities can be measured directly on FORMULA . We notice that
only the averages of some observables with rather large variances can be
observed in these cases. It is impossible to obtain the single eigenvalues of
these observables as results of registration (for an example, see Ref. {{cite:85ae0f37-3653-4c51-9f0f-b9b41b7e969e}} p 181).
Thus, the qualitative difference between macroscopic and microscopic systems
is due to quantum properties of macroscopic systems rather than to some kind
of limits on the validity of quantum mechanics for them.

 Beltrametti-Cassinelli-Lahti model of quantum measurement
We shall
proceed from account {{cite:320611fb-bd5c-48e3-a9c5-bf5f44a9ed2a}} (p 38) of model {{cite:526415a3-8c52-4dfb-b059-7a5c1b857d7c}}. Let a discrete
observable FORMULA  of microsystem FORMULA  with Hilbert space
FORMULA  is registered. Let FORMULA  be the eigenvalues and FORMULA 
be the complete orthonormal set of eigenvectors of FORMULA ,
FORMULA 
We assume that FORMULA  so that there is only a finite number of
different eigenvalues FORMULA . This is justified by the fact that no real
registration apparatus can distinguish all elements of an infinite set from
each other. It can therefore measure only a function of an observable that
maps its spectrum onto a finite set of real numbers. Our observable FORMULA  is such a function.
Let the registration apparatus be a quantum macrosystem FORMULA  with
Hilbert space FORMULA . Let FORMULA  and FORMULA  be prepared in some independent initial states and then interact for a
finite time by coupling FORMULA , where FORMULA  is a unitary
transformation on FORMULA . Then, a theorem has been shown in {{cite:526415a3-8c52-4dfb-b059-7a5c1b857d7c}}:
Theorem 1 For any initial vector state FORMULA  of FORMULA , there is a
set FORMULA  of unit vectors in FORMULA 
satisfying the orthogonality conditions
FORMULA 
such that FORMULA  is a unitary extension of the map
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a set of FORMULA  orthonormal vectors in
FORMULA .

One assumes that states FORMULA  are uniquely associated with what will be
read on the apparatus after the measurement. Then, an important requirement is
that the apparatus is in one of the states FORMULA 
after each individual registration. This is called objectification
requirement.
Suppose that the initial state of FORMULA  is an eigenstate, FORMULA , with the eigenvalue FORMULA . Then, Eq. (REF ) implies that the final state of apparatus FORMULA  is
FORMULA , and the registration does lead to a definite
result. However, suppose next that the initial state is an arbitrary vector
state, FORMULA . Decomposing FORMULA  into the
eigenstates,
FORMULA 
we obtain from Eq. (REF )
FORMULA 
where
FORMULA 
and
FORMULA 
is the probability that a registration of FORMULA  performed on vector
state FORMULA  gives the value FORMULA .
The final state of apparatus FORMULA  is the partial trace over
FORMULA :
FORMULA 
If the objectification requirement is to be satisfied, two
condition must be met:
(A)
The final state of the apparatus must the convex combination of the
form
FORMULA 
(B)
The right-hand side of Eq. (REF ) must be the gemenge structure of the state.

The notion of gemenge will play an important role. The term has been
introduced in Ref. {{cite:320611fb-bd5c-48e3-a9c5-bf5f44a9ed2a}}, some authors use the term 'proper mixture' or
'direct mixture'. The crucial point is that the convex decomposition
FORMULA 
of any state FORMULA  can be a gemenge only if its
preparation procedure FORMULA  is a random mixture with
rates (frequencies) FORMULA  of preparations FORMULA , where
each FORMULA  is some preparation procedure for FORMULA , FORMULA . The preparation mixture can be done by humans or
result from some process in nature.
Thus, gemenge concerns a physical property of preparation rather than any
mathematical characteristic of the right-hand side of Eq. (REF )
(such as FORMULA  being vector states or being mutually orthogonal,
etc). From the mathematical point of view, many different convex
decompositions of a general state FORMULA  may exist. A state is
'extremal' if it cannot be written as a non-trivial convex
combination. Extremal states are described by projections onto one-dimensional
subspaces of the Hilbert space. A preparation of non-extreme state FORMULA  selects only some of the mathematically possible convex decompositions of
FORMULA .
A random mixture of preparations is not uniquely determined by the preparation
process. It can be coarsened or refined i.e. some of FORMULA  can be combined into one preparation procedure or FORMULA  for some FORMULA  can itself be a random mixture of other preparations.
Definition 3 The finest convex decomposition of state FORMULA  defined by
its preparation as gemenge is called gemenge structure of FORMULA .

Thus, gemenge structure of FORMULA  is uniquely determined by
its preparation.
It may be advantageous to distinguish the mathematical convex combination of
states from its gemenge structure by writing the sum in Eq. (REF ) as
follows
FORMULA 
in the case that the right-hand side is a gemenge structure of
FORMULA .
The properties that follow directly from the definition of gemenge structure
and that will be needed later are described by the following theorem.
Theorem 2

Gemenge structure is preserved by unitary dynamics,
FORMULA 
if the sum on the left-hand side describes a gemenge structure of FORMULA , then the gemenge structure of its evolution is described by the sum on
the right-hand side.

In the following sense, gemenge structure is also preserved by
composition of systems. Let FORMULA  be a state of a composite system
FORMULA . The necessary and sufficient condition for the
partial trace over FORMULA  to have the gemenge structure described by
FORMULA 
is that FORMULA  itself has gemenge structure described by
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are some states of FORMULA .


All these ideas on gemenges seem to be well known. Now, an important new point
will be added: the Basic Ontological Hypothesis of Quantum Mechanics (see
Introduction). It leads to a new meaning of gemenge structure: any individual
system prepared in the state (REF ) is objectively in one of the
states FORMULA , because each of the systems has been prepared by one
of the preparations FORMULA , and the probability that
FORMULA  has been used is FORMULA .
It follows that the contents of both points (A) and (B) can be
concisely written as
FORMULA 
Beltrametti-Cassinelli-Lahti model does not satisfy the objectification
criterion because the end state FORMULA 
of the system is FORMULA  (Eq. (REF )),
which is a vector state and can therefore have only a trivial gemenge
structure. Then, Point 2 of Theorem 2 implies that this is not compatible with
state FORMULA  being a non-trivial gemenge.

Model of registration apparatus
To show, how our ideas on
measurement work, we have constructed a model of registration apparatus
{{cite:f88eb839-ef91-4aa1-82e4-0fa1bc4c1a46}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}. It starts by extending and modifying
Beltrametti-Cassinelli-Lahti model by additional assumptions:

Particle FORMULA  is prepared in state FORMULA  and separation
status FORMULA .

FORMULA  is an array of FORMULA  detectors FORMULA  and each
detector has separation status FORMULA  where all FORMULA  are mutually disjoint and
disjoint from FORMULA .

The support of state FORMULA  is FORMULA  for all FORMULA  and FORMULA . It
follows then that,
FORMULA 

Each detector is composite, FORMULA , where FORMULA  consists of all particles of
FORMULA  identical with FORMULA . Let the number of particles in
FORMULA  be FORMULA  and let the state of FORMULA  be FORMULA . Systems FORMULA  either are 'natural' parts of FORMULA 's or they are created quickly after the start of the measurement by
pollution.

FORMULA  is the part of the sensitive matter interacting with
FORMULA  so that FORMULA  is a state of FORMULA .

State (REF ) is not of an end state of FORMULA  but a choice of an intermediate state before an
amplification procedure.

.
The existence of systems FORMULA  leads to a change of the separation
status of FORMULA  after FORMULA  enters a detector. There are
several mathematical possibilities for the choice of the intermediate
state. One of the possibilities is:
Rule 5 The intermediate state of FORMULA  (before amplification) is
FORMULA 

Choices:

The term
FORMULA 
expresses our choice of symmetrisation or anti-symmetrisation and FORMULA  is
a normalisation factor that makes FORMULA  to a state (action of
FORMULA ).

Some correlations have been erased so that the state operator FORMULA  is diagonal.

The convex decomposition (REF ) is postulated to be the gemenge
structure of FORMULA .

The choices 2. and 3. are dictated by the objectification
requirement which can be regarded as an experimental fact.
Finally, we can show that the new rule cannot be disproved by measuring the
'erased' correlations if standard quantum mechanical rules on jointly
measurable observables hold {{cite:f88eb839-ef91-4aa1-82e4-0fa1bc4c1a46}}, {{cite:4baa9826-5e9d-41a7-942c-c422dc87ed13}}.

Conclusion
We have improved understanding of the theory of identical
particles and removed a disorder in textbook quantum mechanics. This has lead
to the notion of separation status. We have discovered the crucial role that
detectors have in the theory. Then, both preparations and registrations
include changes of separation status, which are changes of kinematic
description and so even more radical than 'collapse of the wave function'. The
theoretical freedom in changes of separation status has been used to satisfy
objectification requirement. Thus, a deep revision of quantum theory of
measurement results that has been derived with the help of standard principles
of quantum mechanics from analysis of real measurement processes.
As yet, our results are limited to non-relativistic quantum mechanics and to
measurements performed on microsystems. Moreover, only special kind of
measurements have been considered, registrations of discrete observables with
the help of unitary measurement couplings, the definition assumptions of
Beltrametti-Cassinelli-Lahti model. Much work remains to be done.
Acknowledgements
The author is indebted to Štefan
Jánoš and Jiří Tolar for important suggestions.
