

Black Holes with Scalar Hairs in Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet Gravity
Y. Brihaye FORMULAemail: yves.brihaye@umons.ac.be ,
L. Ducobu  FORMULAemail: ludovic.ducobu@student.umons.ac.be
 FORMULAPhysique-Mathématique, Université de
Mons, 7000 Mons, Belgium2018/12/11 02:35:57The Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet gravity in five dimensions is extended by scalar fields and the corresponding
equations are reduced to a system of non-linear differential equations.
A large family of regular solutions of these equations is shown to exist. Generically, these solutions are
spinning black holes with scalar hairs.
They can be characterized (but not uniquely) by an horizon and an angular velocity on this horizon.
Taking particular limits the black holes approach boson star or become extremal, in any case the limiting configurations
remain hairy.
   PACS Numbers: 04.70.-s, 04.50.Gh, 11.25.Tq
Introduction
Much attention was devoted during the recent years to gravity theories supplemented by scalar fields.
There are several reasons for that : scalar fields appear as fundamental constituents in
the standard model of particle physics as well as in numerous models attempting to go beyond this well tested theory.
Bypassing the long standing 'No Hair Theorem', black holes solutions with scalar hairs have been constructed
in {{cite:638f4121-5e8e-45d0-9f28-c7f36398439e}}, {{cite:657df10f-1ec3-480d-bca7-df97d4efe667}}. These new solutions
of the Einstein-Klein-Gordon equations were constructed for a single massive complex
scalar field and exist provide the black hole rotates sufficiently fast; as so they provide
hairy generalizations of Kerr black holes.
The influence of a self-gravitating potential on these solutions was studied in {{cite:4a332459-5bf4-4a31-b8df-73559428e694}}.
Among the numerous theoretical ideas explored to encompass the standard model and, hopefully, to improve our
understanding of the Universe, models formulated in more than four dimensional space-times
emerge as promising candidates. Progressively they motivate the study of general relativity in FORMULA  dimensions.
The understanding of the gravitational interaction in higher dimensions and the classification of the underlying
classical solutions, like black holes and other compact objects, constitue a research topic by itself.
Even in the vacuum,
the richness of the solutions available in FORMULA  dimensions {{cite:a722d88d-10c8-4cf1-86d1-36313bcd3c5d}} is remarkable.
In particular the black holes are characterized by FORMULA  independent angular momenta.
For odd number of dimensions, spinning solutions
with all equal angular momentum present an enhanced symmetry, the underlying equations can be set
in co-dimension one problem allowing for simplifications in the more elaborated dynamical equations.
This feature can be used, in some circumstances, to study some dynamical processes,
(e.g. collapsing shells in rotations {{cite:206cdb4c-6ac2-4f94-8888-59d31e63afd3}}).
Some calculations can be performed more easily in a space-time with five -rather than four-
dimensions.
The construction of hairy black holes in higher dimensions therefore appeared as a natural continuation
of the work {{cite:638f4121-5e8e-45d0-9f28-c7f36398439e}} and it was the object of {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}. In that paper
it was shown that Myers-Perry black holes with scalar hairs exist on a specific domain of the two-dimensional
parameter space of the problem : the black hole horizon and the angular velocity of the solution on the
horizon. Interestingly, and contrasting with respect to
their 4-dimensional analogs, these hairy black holes do not approach the
pure vacuum Myers-Perry solutions in any limit. The two families are disjoined, separated by a mass gap.
This property provides an
example of difference of the gravitational interaction which can occur for different dimensions. Such
differences can be accounted on the non-linear character of the Einstein equations.
The black holes obtained in {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} and in this paper are asymptotically flat
and characterized by the fact that
they possess a single Killing field. This notion was introduced in {{cite:413188fe-661e-42a9-bb38-e61e62c9d15b}}
where families of asymptotically AdS, spinning, hairy black holes and bosons stars were also constructed in
five dimensions. In this case, pure AdS space-time is approached uniformly while the scalar field tends to zero.
The generalization of these solutions to higher dimensions is emphasized in {{cite:b797cff8-2f36-4646-b3d9-77e2ca0b8458}}, {{cite:0706c044-de01-44ce-abff-e60d5aebe04c}}.
The solutions of {{cite:638f4121-5e8e-45d0-9f28-c7f36398439e}}, {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} are constructed for a minimal potential
of the scalar field: a mass term. Along the lines of {{cite:4a332459-5bf4-4a31-b8df-73559428e694}}, we study in this paper the
influence of the non quadratic interaction on the solutions. The choice of the potential is explained
in the paper.
Another feature of gravity in higher dimensions is the fact that the standard Einstein-Hilbert action
can be supplemented by a hierarchy of terms involving higher powers of the Riemann tensor. For FORMULA  there
exist one such a term, the Gauss-Bonnet term and the general lagrangian for gravity is know as
Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet (EGB) gravity.
The corresponding equations are in general more involved that the Einstein equation and the enhanced non linearity
has generically an influence of the solutions.
Five-dimensional spinning boson stars in EGB gravity were constructed in
{{cite:85e82d7f-ef1b-4b87-a6bf-9a45b796e020}} with a negative cosmological constant and in {{cite:f7e5504e-3421-414f-98a4-7f270d014ac5}}, {{cite:cfdd4b5d-df09-4af7-9fcb-81fce44da57a}} with FORMULA .
In both cases, it was found that the solutions exist for a limited range of the Gauss-Bonnet coupling constant.
Up to our knowledge, the existence of hairy black holes in higher dimensional EGB gravity was not emphasized yet.
In this paper, we study these equations and we present strong
numerical evidence that the hairy black holes occurring in Einstein gravity can be extended to EGB gravity
up to a maximal value (depending of the angular velocity) of Gauss-Bonnet coupling constant.
The paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2 we present the model, the ansatz and discuss some physical quantities which are relevant
for the understanding of the pattern of the solutions.
In Section 3 we describe the influence of an a self-interacting potential on the Q-balls, the boson star
and the black holes. Section 4 is devoted to the construction of
hairy black holes in Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet gravity.
Finally in section 5 we finish our discussion giving some further remarks.

The Model
We want to study spinning boson stars and black holes
in 5-dimensional Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet (EGB) gravity.
The model is described by the following Lagrangian density
FORMULA 
Here FORMULA  represents the Ricci scalar, FORMULA  is the cosmological constant,
and FORMULA  is the Gauss-Bonnet term. It is constructed out of the Riemann tensor in the standard way :
FORMULA 
with FORMULA  and FORMULA  denotes the Gauss-Bonnet coupling constant.
The matter sector of the model consists of a doublet of complex scalar fields with the same mass FORMULA 
and denoted by FORMULA  in (REF ) where we supplemented a self-interaction FORMULA .
The full model presents an FORMULA  global symmetry.
The Noether current associated to the FORMULA  subgroup,
i.e. FORMULA , and the corresponding
conserved charge FORMULA  will play an important role in the discussion of the solutions.
The variation of the action (REF ) with respect to the metric and the scalar field leads to the
Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet-Klein-Gordon equations. They are written in many places
(namely in {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} with the same notations) and we do not repeat them here.
The Lagrangian (REF ) constitutes one of the simplest way to couple matter minimally to gravity.
Assuming FORMULA , the coupled system admits regular, localized, stationary solutions: the boson stars
(see e.g. {{cite:a7a07491-86b8-41f1-ac6f-8ca12cf7a4e6}} for a review).
Boson stars in FORMULA  dimensional space-times were investigated namely in {{cite:d166c5a4-ea23-4adf-bf57-142d70f355bc}}, {{cite:dace16d2-d7f1-4354-9c92-1d65bd743513}}, {{cite:0723df9d-b50e-40bc-884e-4c9e8936a1d2}}.
The ansatz
In principle, spinning solutions in 5-dimensional space-time
can possess two independent angular momenta associated to the two orthogonal planes of rotation present in 4-dimensional
space. One can however restrict oneself to the case of equal angular momenta.
Boson stars possessing two equal angular momentum can be constructed in the above theory,
by using an appropriate anzatz for the metric and the scalar field {{cite:33066ee8-5d64-41db-a661-b844f6e8bc3a}}.
Interestingly, this ansatz leads to a system of differential equations.
Spinning boson stars in EGB gravity have been studied in details in {{cite:85e82d7f-ef1b-4b87-a6bf-9a45b796e020}}
in the case FORMULA  and FORMULA .
Asymptotically flat, spinning boson stars and black holes (with FORMULA ) were constructed in
{{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} for Einstein gravity.
The goal of this paper is to study the influence of a self-interaction
and/or of the Gauss-Bonnet term on these solutions.
From now on, we will deal with asymptotically flat solutions only.
Metric ansatz for the boson stars : 
The relevant Ansatz for the metric reads
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  runs from 0 to FORMULA , while FORMULA  and FORMULA  are
in the range FORMULA .
The corresponding space-time possess two rotation planes at FORMULA  and FORMULA 
and the natural FORMULA  symmetry group is enhanced to FORMULA .
The metric above still leaves the diffeomorphisms related to the definitions of the radial variable FORMULA  unfixed.
For the numerical construction of the solutions it is convenient to fix this freedom by setting FORMULA .
The key point of the construction is to choose the scalar doublet of the form
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is a doublet of unit length that depends on the angular coordinates.
The standard non spinning solutions are recovered by means of the particular form
FORMULA 
while for
rotating solutions the parametrization is {{cite:33066ee8-5d64-41db-a661-b844f6e8bc3a}}
FORMULA 
This parametrization transforms the Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet-Klein-Gordon equations into a consistent set of differential equations.
While the metric (REF )
has three commuting Killing vector fields FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA ,
the scalar doublet of the rotating solution with (REF ) is invariant only
under one possible combination of these vectors {{cite:413188fe-661e-42a9-bb38-e61e62c9d15b}}, namely
FORMULA 
The boson stars therefore have a single Killing vector.
Metric ansatz for the black holes : 
In order to construct the black holes, we used a slightly different ansatz which was first proposed in
{{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are functions of FORMULA  only and FORMULA  denotes the position of the horizon. Note that
the radial variable FORMULA  has different meaning in (REF ) and (REF ).
The above statement about the Killing symmetry still holds and
the spinning hairy black holes that we obtained possess a single Killing vector field.
The goal of this paper is to study the response of pattern of the 'minimal' boson stars and hairy black
holes (i.e. in Einstein gravity and with a mass potential) to a self-interaction of the scalar field
and to the Gauss-Bonnet interaction.

Physical quantities
The solutions can be characterized by several physical parameters, some of them are associated with the globally
conserved quantities. The charge FORMULA  associated to the U(1) symmetry has some relevance;
in terms of the ansatzs (REF ),(REF ), the charge FORMULA  takes respectively the forms
FORMULA 
Interestingly, it was shown {{cite:33066ee8-5d64-41db-a661-b844f6e8bc3a}} that the charge FORMULA  is related to the sum of the two (equal) angular
momentum of the solution : FORMULA . The mass of the solution FORMULA 
and the angular momentum FORMULA  can be obtained from the asymptotic decay of some
components of the metric :
FORMULA 
On the other hand, the black holes have an entropy and a temperature :
FORMULA 
The speed of rotation of the black hole at the horizon is given by FORMULA .

Asymptotic and boundary conditions
Boson stars
The ansatz above transforms the field equations into a set of five differential equations in the five radial fields.
For boson stars, the equation for FORMULA  is of the first order while the equations for FORMULA  are of the second
order.
The Taylor expansion of the fields about the origin takes the form
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  are constants.
The constants FORMULA , FORMULA , FORMULA  are determined in a straightforward way leading to
FORMULA 
and a lengthy expression for FORMULA . The constants FORMULA  are related by the condition
FORMULA 
which is linear if FORMULA  and quadratic for EGB gravity FORMULA .
In principle, all the orders of the Taylor expansion are determined in terms of FORMULA  and FORMULA  (or alternatively of FORMULA  obeying (REF )). For FORMULA , the constraint imposes some limit
in FORMULA  for spinning boson stars of definite angular momentum {{cite:cfdd4b5d-df09-4af7-9fcb-81fce44da57a}}.
In the asymptotic region, the metric has to approach the Minkowski space-time and the scalar field vanishes.
Finally, the single parameter FORMULA  is sufficient to characterize a solution.

Black holes
The ansatz adopted for black holes leads to five second order equations. The regularity at the horizon
imposes the derivatives of the fields FORMULA  (FORMULA ) to vanish at the horizon and FORMULA .
So, the angular velocity on the horizon of the black holes should coincide with the harmonic frequency FORMULA 
of the scalar field set in (REF ).
As for boson stars, all fields should vanish in the limit FORMULA .
The parameters FORMULA  and FORMULA  are, in principle, sufficient to characterize
a black hole. We will see that the domain of existence is quite limited
and that -on this domain- more than one solution can correspond to a choice FORMULA .

Self-Interacting solutions in Einstein gravity
Here we want to construct the bosons star and Q-ball associated to a polynomial potentials of the form
FORMULA 
Because of the numerous parameters, we will put the emphasis on two particular cases
which can be considered as extremal:

The case FORMULA , FORMULA . This case then corresponds
to a mass term only and the corresponding solutions have been studied in details in
{{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}, in the case of Einstein gravity.
This mass potential will be denoted FORMULA  in the following.
As demonstrated in {{cite:f4b55fcc-41f7-4ea5-aac2-d6c675e1e068}} the boson stars do not admit Q-balls counterpart in this case.
The gravitating parameter FORMULA  can be rescaled in the scalar field.
The solutions corresponding to EGB gravity will be presented for this potential only.

The case FORMULA , FORMULA .
This choice corresponds to a positive
definite potential presenting two degenerate local minima at FORMULA  and FORMULA .
It was proposed {{cite:79a34f4e-f128-4ca3-b29d-8f53254ac79a}} and allow for solutions to exist in the absence of gravity.
In lower dimensions, this potential was used for the study of kink collisions, see e.g. {{cite:15d4597f-2123-4e10-960f-e9f0958a2d0f}}.
Four-dimensional charged boson stars have been constructed in {{cite:5e15f196-25e9-475c-908e-c6d24cc77e70}} with such a potential.
In the following the corresponding potential will be denoted FORMULA .
For this potential, the gravity constant and the value FORMULA  can be combined into a dimensionless quantity
noted FORMULA .

The field equations are coupled, non-linear differential equations with boundary conditions.
To our knowledge, they do not admit closed form solutions
and approximation techniques have to be used.
For instance, the relevant solutions can be obtained numerically
by a fine tuning of the parameters FORMULA  and FORMULA 
in such a way that the boundary conditions are obeyed.
For our numerical construction we used the numerical
solver COLSYS {{cite:aeac2ad7-0b5b-469d-bba4-38e558e6ca42}} based on the Newton-Rafson algorithm.
Q-balls
We first present the solutions obtained in the absence of gravity (i.e. with FORMULA ).
The only parameter to vary is the value FORMULA  (or equivalently the frequency FORMULA ).
Along with boson stars in four dimensions, families of solutions exist
with different numbers of nodes of the scalar function FORMULA .
For simplicity, we addressed only the solutions for which the scalar function has no nodes. The solutions with nodes
are usually considered as excited modes of these 'fundamental' one.
FIGURE 
The Q-balls can be constructed numerically by increasing progressively the control parameter FORMULA ,
forming a branch to which we refer as the main branch.
In the limit FORMULA , the vacuum configuration FORMULA  is uniformly approached while FORMULA .
The convergence is slow and quantities like the mass (and also the charge)
converge to a finite value, forming a mass gap. As demonstrated by Fig. REF , the
solutions exist up to a maximal value of parameter FORMULA ; we find FORMULA 
corresponding to a frequency FORMULA . Solving the equations for lower values of the frequency reveals
the existence of another branch of Q-balls, let us call it the second branch.
We found strong indications that these solutions exist for FORMULA  and
FORMULA  (with FORMULA ).
The numerical construction of the solutions of the second branch
is difficult for the small values of FORMULA  (the star 'FORMULA ' on Fig. REF 
represents the limit where our numerical solutions became unreliable). In this region,
the profile of the function FORMULA  presents a pronounced abrupt wall for FORMULA 
(we define the parameter FORMULA  as the value of FORMULA 
where the function FORMULA  attains its local minimum).
This wall separates two plateaus; the first one has FORMULA  (for FORMULA ) and
the second at FORMULA  (for FORMULA ).
As an illustration of this result the profiles of the two solitons corresponding to FORMULA  (one for each branch)
are shown on Fig. REF .
The numerical results show that, in the limit FORMULA ,
the mass, the charge and the radius FORMULA  of the solution tends to infinity:
this can be related to the fact that no attractive force (like gravity)
is operating, as a consequence the star can spread arbitrarily large in space.
FIGURE 
The solutions on the main branch correspond to high frequencies
FORMULA  and have FORMULA ;
interestingly the solutions of second branch correspond to low frequencies
(FORMULA ) and have
FORMULA . Following standard arguments about the classical stability of Q-balls, only
the solutions of the second branch are classically stable.

Boson stars
Boson stars correspond to deformations of the Q-balls (see previous section) for FORMULA .
Once coupled to gravity the pattern of the solutions change qualitatively.
The major difference between boson stars
and Q-balls is that -contrary to Q-balls- boson stars exist for large values of FORMULA .
Several features of Q-balls and bosons stars are illustrated on Fig. REF  for three values of FORMULA .
For fixed FORMULA  and FORMULA  increasing, the value FORMULA  approaches zero while
the value of the Ricci scalar at the origin (say FORMULA )
increases roughly quadratically.
This suggests that a singular configuration is approached
in the limit FORMULA . Outside the central region (we find typically for FORMULA )
the metric and the the scalar field are rather intensive to the increase of FORMULA . In particular, FORMULA 
approaches constants for FORMULA  (these constants depend, off course, on FORMULA ).
Note that no counterpart of the second branch of Q-ball is found. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that
the attracting gravitational interaction keeps the matter field relatively compact
and does not allow for an extension in an arbitrarily large volume.
Since Q-balls (FORMULA ) do not exist for FORMULA , it is natural
to examine the behavior of boson stars (FORMULA ) for fixed values of FORMULA , greater than FORMULA , and decreasing the parameter FORMULA .
It turns out that the parameters FORMULA  (and similarly FORMULA ) increases, likely tending to infinity
in the limit FORMULA .
We find in particular FORMULA : as it could be expected,
the decreases gravity, through the effective coupling parameter FORMULA , allows for compact object with
larger and larger size
to form.
FIGURE 
To illustrate this statement, the profiles of the different fields corresponding
to FORMULA  and FORMULA  are presented on Fig. REF .
We further notice that the Ricci scalar FORMULA  approaches uniformly the null function although the metric
potentials keep non trivial profiles.
FIGURE 
Comparison of the FORMULA  and FORMULA  potentials : 
As pointed out already, boson stars exist with the mass potential FORMULA . On Fig. REF  the charge and the
mass of the minimal and self-interacting boson stars are superposed. The non linear interaction clearly allows for
solutions with a lower frequency, then also corresponding to a slower speed of rotation on the horizon.
The minimal boson stars have FORMULA  on their whole domain
of FORMULA . Accordingly, they have no positive binging energy and are classically unstable.
The interaction makes the solutions classically stable for the low values of the frequency.

Black holes
The construction of black holes in Einstein gravity and for the mass potential constitutes the object of {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}.
It was found that black holes exist in a very specific domain of the parameters FORMULA 
(see in particular Fig. 1 of {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}).
Here we will present the influence of the self-interaction FORMULA  on the families of black holes obtained in that paper.
The pattern of solutions is quite involved. It turns out that,
corresponding to a fixed value of FORMULA , two (and sometimes even four) branches of black holes exist
on specific intervals of the horizon parameter FORMULA .
In order to describe the pattern,
let us choose one particular boson star characterized by a frequency FORMULA .
Integrating the black holes equations for this value of FORMULA  we find that one branch of black holes exist
for FORMULA . In the limit FORMULA  the limiting solution on this branch approaches the
starting boson star; correspondingly, the temperature FORMULA  diverges while the horizon area FORMULA  tends to zero.
In the following, we will refer to such a family of black holes as to the BS-branch.
The data corresponding to FORMULA  (i.e. close to the limiting value FORMULA ) is reported on Fig. REF .
FIGURE 
A careful study of the equations for the same value of FORMULA  reveal that another branch of solutions exists,
also labeled by the horizon parameter FORMULA .
In the limit FORMULA  the solutions of this second branch terminate either into an extremal black hole
(in this case the temperature FORMULA  tends to zero) or into another boson star with the same FORMULA .
Setting FORMULA  (see Fig. REF ) the second branch indeed terminates into an extremal black hole;
we labeled it the FORMULA -branch. The FORMULA -branch and FORMULA -branch coincide for FORMULA .
We found that the value FORMULA  decreases slowly with FORMULA ; for example FORMULA 
for FORMULA  and FORMULA  for FORMULA .
FIGURE 
FIGURE 
Repeating this operation with different values of FORMULA  to determine the domain of existence
of the solutions is quite demanding; we therefore employed a slightly different strategy.
We constructed the families of black holes corresponding to fixed values of FORMULA  and varying FORMULA .
Several features of the pattern are illustrated
on Figs. REF , where some parameters (mainly the mass)
are reported in function of FORMULA .
These figures, where for definiteness we set FORMULA , appeals several comments :

On Fig.REF  (left part) the mass of
boson star and of the extremal solution are given in the region FORMULA .

The values of the scalar field on the horizon for the black holes with FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are superposed on right side of Fig. REF . The FORMULA  relation for these black holes
is supplemented in the insert in the left side of the figure.

For FORMULA  and FORMULA  we have FORMULA .
For intermediate values of FORMULA  we have instead FORMULA .
This contrasts with the case of the mass term (see {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}}).

Figs. REF  show the mass-frequency dependence in the region
of the small frequencies. The left side shows a comparison between the mass of boson star
(dashed red line) and the mass of the black hole corresponding to FORMULA  (black line).
The curve corresponding to the black holes of the FORMULA -branch is all long
very close to the curve corrsponding to the boson star.
These curves can hardly be distinguished on the graphic but
separate only when the boson star mass starts spiraling.
For each FORMULA  such that FORMULA  four black holes with different masses exist.
The FORMULA -branch and FORMULA -branch join at the point marked FORMULA  corresponding to FORMULA  and FORMULA .
This value is very close to the mass of the corresponding boson star.

Increasing the horizon value, the pattern get simpler. In particular the points marked FORMULA 
on the figure disappear and only two solutions persist
for all accessible values of FORMULA . The masses corresponding to FORMULA  and FORMULA 
are compared on Fig. REF  (right part).

As Figs.  and  reveal, the pattern of the black holes solutions is quite involved
and uneasy to describe solely with the control parameters FORMULA  and FORMULA . On Fig. REF 
we illustrate another feature of the solutions by using a mass-temperature plot
for the solutions corresponding to FORMULA  and FORMULA .
In each case, the points where the curves stop correspond to the limit FORMULA .
The use of FORMULA  as parameter allows one to disentangled the BS and Ex-branches.
The range of accessible
temperature for a definite FORMULA  decreases while FORMULA  increases and collapse for FORMULA .
The three points labeled FORMULA  on this graphic correspond to the critical values marked also in Fig. REF .
FIGURE 
To conclude this section let us stress a few differences between the families of black holes associated
with the FORMULA  and FORMULA  potentials :
(i)
The black holes can exist
for smaller values of FORMULA  (i.e. angular velocity at the horizon) than for the mass potential.
(ii)
Our results suggest that considering smaller values of FORMULA 
would result into the occurrence of black holes with arbitrarily small values of FORMULA .
The numerical construction becomes however difficult.
(iii)
The black holes with the low values for FORMULA  have much
higher masses (and charge FORMULA ) than the ones close to the limit FORMULA .


Solutions in EGB gravity
As said already, the influence of the Gauss-Bonnet term on spinning boson stars existing in 5-dimensional gravity
was studied by several authors. A general feature seems to be that any solution of this type
can be deformed continuously by progressively increasing the Gauss-Bonnet parameter FORMULA  and
ceases to exist at a critical value, say FORMULA .
FIGURE 
The reasons of this limitation can be found analytically {{cite:85e82d7f-ef1b-4b87-a6bf-9a45b796e020}}, {{cite:cfdd4b5d-df09-4af7-9fcb-81fce44da57a}}
by performing a Taylor expansion of the solutions around the origin.
It turns out that Gauss-Bonnet interaction implies some
quadratic constraints like (REF ) between the Taylor coefficients; as a consequence
some coefficients might become complex for large values of FORMULA  and the solution stops to be real.
Since the black holes are only considered outside their event horizon, the question of their existence
for FORMULA  raises naturally.
TABLE 
We have examined the deformations of the black holes for FORMULA . For simplicity, we have considered
the case of a mass-potential. As pointed out above there exist two black holes corresponding to a choice
of FORMULA  and FORMULA . We distinguish these solution as belonging to the FORMULA -branch (connected to extremal black holes)
and FORMULA -branch (connected to boson star).
It turns out that the deformation of a couple of such solutions for FORMULA  leads to two branches of solutions which
terminate into a single solution at some maximal value FORMULA .
On Fig. REF , we show the dependence of the mass FORMULA 
and of the charge FORMULA  on FORMULA  for FORMULA  and for two values of FORMULA  (for instance FORMULA  and FORMULA ).
We have constructed the solutions for several values of FORMULA  and obtaining the same pattern. Values of FORMULA 
corresponding to a few choices of FORMULA  and FORMULA  are given in Table 1.
For a fixed FORMULA , the value FORMULA  decreases monotonically with increasing FORMULA . We noticed a strong
decrease with FORMULA  of the temperature of the solution corresponding to the FORMULA -branch while increasing FORMULA .

Conclusions
Very recently there was a strong interest for astrophysical objects presenting scalar hairs,
see for example {{cite:2943de65-9579-47a4-9bce-f8e5bb82f01b}},
{{cite:25eb4a8b-f163-4bc0-9a3f-45540e51cd95}}, {{cite:b16f8d87-3c8b-486b-a988-10532fb5832e}}, {{cite:b72be837-0134-49e2-aca4-039ec9ecee74}}.
This type of research motivate the study of the possible hair structure occurring around compact gravitating objects.
In many cases, bosons star and/or hairy black holes are continuously connected to vacuum solutions, i.e. they
loose their hair in some limit of the parameter space. In this respect, the hairy black holes constructed in
{{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} are different since their scalar cloud cannot be dissolved by taking
a special limit; in other words they are disjoined
from the well know Myers-Perry vacuum solutions. This property is, likely, due to a peculiar
non-linear effect in the equations. The question of the persistence of this feature in more general models then
raises naturally.
In this paper, we have extended the results of {{cite:43acc68c-29b5-4049-9012-3b6e7f59634e}} in two directions:
(i)
We included a self-interaction for the scalar field by mean of a potential possessing a non trivial vacuum manifold.
We guess that all intermediated potentials between FORMULA  and FORMULA  would lead to similar properties.
(ii)
Extending the gravity sector
by a Gauss-Bonnet term which is believed to encode corrections to Einstein gravity
coming from string theory.

The results is that the clouds of the solutions keep their distinguished property in both cases.
As new features let us
stress that the self-interaction allows for spinning black hole with (in principle) arbitrarily small-but non vanishing-
angular velocity on the horizon, say FORMULA .
Only when this parameter become sufficiently small do the boson stars constitute classically stable configurations.
In the case of EGB gravity, we have shown that, for all values of FORMULA  allowing
for hairy black holes, there exist a couple of corresponding solutions. These two solutions exist up to
a maximal value of the Gauss-Bonnet coupling constant, say FORMULA , and converge to a single solution in the limit
FORMULA .
Note added: While finishing this paper we were aware of {{cite:3ddb5f9e-3a5e-482b-9dfe-92da7e0a8c2a}}
where hairy black holes in four dimensional Einstein-Gauss-Bonnet-dilaton gravity
are constructed.
