
VIALACTEA knowledge base
homogenizing access to Milky Way data
[a]Marco Molinaro
[a]Robert Butora
[b]Marilena Bandieramonte
[b]Ugo Becciani
[c]Massimo Brescia
[c]Stefano Cavuoti
[b]Alessandro Costa
[d]Anna M. Di Giorgio
[d]Davide Elia
[e]Akos Hajnal
[e]Hermann Gabor
[e]Peter Kacsuk
[d]Scige J. Liu
[d]Sergio Molinari
[c]Giuseppe Riccio
[d]Eugenio Schisano
[b]Eva Sciacca
[a]Riccardo Smareglia
[b]Fabio Vitello
[a]INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo 11 -
34143 Trieste, Italy
[b]INAF - Osservatorio Astrofisico di Catania, Via S. Sofia 78 - 95123
Catania, Italy
[c]INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte, Salita Moiariello 16 -
80131 Napoli, Italy
[d]INAF - Istituto di Astrofisica e Planetologia Spaziali, Area di
Ricerca di Tor Vergata,
via Fosso del Cavaliere 100 - 00133 Roma, Italy
[e]MTA-SZTAKI, 1111 Budapest, Kende u. 13-17, Hungary
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Marco
Molinaro)
Marco Molinaro: E-mail: molinaro@oats.inaf.it, Telephone: +39 040
3199 152

The VIALACTEA project has a work package dedicated to “Tools and
Infrastructure” and, inside it, a task for the “Database and Virtual
Observatory Infrastructure”. This task aims at providing an infrastructure to
store all the resources needed by the, more purposely, scientific work packages
of the project itself. This infrastructure includes a combination of: storage
facilities, relational databases and web services on top of them, and has taken,
as a whole, the name of VIALACTEA Knowledge Base (VLKB). This contribution
illustrates the current status of this VLKB. It details the set of data
resources put together; describes the database that allows data discovery
through VO inspired metadata mainteinance; illustrates the discovery, cutout and
access services built on top of the former two for the users to exploit the data
content.
Databases, VO, Data Access, Milky Way
INTRODUCTION
The VIALACTEA project goal is to bring to a common forum the major
new-generation surveys of the Galactic Plane in the radio band, both in thermal
continuum and in atomic and molecular lines, from Europe-funded space missions
and ground-based facilities, to engage one of the fundamental challenges in
Galactic astronomy: to quantify in our galaxy
the relationship between the physical agents responsible for the onset and the
regulation of star formation
in a spiral galaxy and the resulting rate and efficiency of star formation, and
obtain a “star formation recipe” that
will be a cornerstone to trace the star formation history of galaxies back to
their formation.
Among the work packages the project is composed of, one incorporates the
activities needed to ensure that a computing infrastructure and a set of
data-mining, machine-learning, visual analytics and 3D visualization tools are
in place according to astronomers specifications.
The input data that the computational tasks should start from, as well as the output
results the various tasks will provide form a knowledge base that is, in turn, the
goal of one task of this latter work package.
This contribution focuses on this task, the creation and maintenance, as well as the
access interfaces, of the VIALACTEA Knowledge Base (VLKB).
Section  will briefly describe the project work packages and tasks and
give a more detailed view of the “tools and infrastructure” work package (Sec.
REF ), with specific attention to the VLKB (Sec. REF ).
Section  will then focus on the heterogeneous content of the storage
(Sec. REF ) available to the VIALACTEA community and the database
(Sec. REF ) that contains the storage metadata descriptions as well as
catalogued data consumed or provided by the project's scientific tasks.
Next section (Sec. ) will then describe the search and access
interfaces that live on top of the above data collections; Sec. REF  focuses
on the generic TAP interface (Table Access Protocol{{cite:8a4a5f16-814d-40cf-8eab-1162b6917ed1}} , an IVOA standard)
that exposes the database content in an interoperable way while Sec. REF  describes
in details the dedicated discovery and access interfaces that allow filtering of data
collections and retrieval of the actual data files.

PROJECT OVERVIEW
The VIALACTEA project consists of four scientific work packages (WPs), a technical one
(WP 5, that we will touch in more details in Sec. REF ) and other packages
dedicated to dissemination, management and coordination activities.
Scientific packages' tasks span from diffuse and compact structure analysis (WP 1 & 2) to
distance estimation (WP 3) and their outputs are then combined into a global scenario of
the galaxy as a star formation engine within WP 4 tasks.
All the scientific tasks need some data to start from and produce some output to be
preserved:

diffuse structure analysis produce catalogues of filamentary and bubble
structure out of continuum radio surveys using morphological analysis and radiative
transfer modeling;

compact source analysis provides a catalogue of compact sources out of
continuum surveys and combines it with catalogues at different wavelengths to have a multi
band catalogue to fit against synthetic protocluster models (another project output);

distance estimation uses kinematical analysis of existing radio spectroscopic
surveys and project generated 3D extinction maps to produce distance estimation of
compact sources or other diffuse regions of the galaxy plane.

All of these tasks output are then combined into WP4 tasks for the final scientific goals
of the project.
The goal of WP 5, “Tools and Infrastructures” is to provide technical support in running
and developing the tools and recipes needed by the scientific counterpart.
VIALACTEA Tools and Infrastructures
There are four main activities in this work package:
Database and Virtual Observatory Infrastructure:
to have a common set of
resources to be used for scientific input and collect the project outputs. This is what
this paper is for, the main product of this activity being the setup and maintenance of
the VLKB and its interfaces;
Data Mining Systems:
to develop intelligent integrated systems directly
supporting scientific decision making and situation awareness by dynamically
integrating, correlating, fusing and analysing extremely large volumes of disparate data
resources and streams;
3D visual analytics systems:
allowing the astronomer to easily conduct research
activities using advanced visual methods for multidimensional data and information
visualization, real-time data interaction to carry out complex tasks for multi-criteria
data/metadata queries for subsample selection and further analysis, or real-time
control of data fitting to theoretical models;
Science Gateway:
to enable workflows based on the analysis tools and recipes and
run them through the WS-PGRADE/gUSE gateway system.

The tools and infrastructure developed through these activities should bring the
researcher from the input data to the result in an easy reproducible way, moving, at least
partially, the steps of data retrieval, decision making, visual inspection of the
information and/or results and job runs from manual tasks to automated ones.
The VLKB acts in this scenario as the data resource repository with interoperable
capabilities and custom access interfaces. As already mentioned, the resources collection
will be reported in Sec.  and the interfaces on top of them in the
subsequent Sec. .
Database and Virtual Observatory Infrastructure
The task activity within which the VLKB has been developed was defined as the one to carry
out the archival goals of the project as well as the data repository for all of the
initial data resources needed by the scientific work packages.
The idea was to have a common resource to follow the VO guidelines for interoperability
while paying specific attention to the project needs. One of the main issues in keeping
the pace with the IVOA standards has been to develop a project on the most recent
specifications the VO was discussing upon. This would have been of great help in the
VIALACTEA scenario if some specific internal requirements were not in conflict. The result
is that the VLKB and its interfaces are currently not completely developed using IVOA
protocols, but are ready to be mapped onto them given some time resource (which may be
tricky since VIALACTEA is at the end of its life cycle).
The actual result of this task activity (which will be better summarized in Sec. 
) is a resource composed of a set of heterogeneous data collections of
observational data, in form of images or multi-dimensional datasets and catalogues,
alongside database schemata and relations dedicated both to metadescription of the
mentioned data collections and catalogues produced by the project work package activities.
The discovery, access and retrieval solutions on top of these common resource (the VLKB) is based on an IVOA TAP service for all of the database content that needs to be exposed to the community plus some dedicated search, cutout and merge solutions for the 2D and 3D datasets available through the project. This latter secures the datasets (which are a mix of public and private policy ones) and allows search also for project specific datasets, like the 3D extinction maps of the galaxy produced inside the project itself.

VLKB DATA COLLECTIONS
The data content of the VLKB comes in two main archival formats:

storage FITS files;

relational database schemata.

In this section we describe them both as are currently available (or planned by the end of
the project) following the above distinction, instead of following an input vs. output
categorization or a task-based one. Descriptions will take into account:

dataset origin: from within the project or mirror/redistribution of an existing resource;

resource weight (in terms of datasets, file sizes, catalogue records);

The interfaces to discovery, access and retrieval of the resources is left to the following
section (Sec. ).
Storage Content
The storage contains files in FITS{{cite:8cc64329-97bb-4616-9200-900afb9aa929}} format only, but they're
rather heterogeneous. Those FITS files, indeed, span from 2D images in the radio continuum
to 3D FITS cubes containing radio velocity spectra at specific molecular lines and also a
collection of 3D extinction maps.
But the number of dimensions and type of axis is not the only difference between the
various data collections deployed. There are differences in coordinate system and sky
frame references, galactic coordinates versus equatorial ones to explicit the most easy
one to handle, as well as degenerate axis references and multiple HDUs or non-standard
keywords in the FITS header.
Most prominent, however, were the actual observational differences, that is, the various
surveys, and observational bands within them, that have been used in the scientific
analysis of the VIALACTEA project. Taking into accout what has been labeled as a
sub-survey (i.e. a collection of data from a specific survey or pointed archive
referring to only one single molecular or band or other specific metadata), about 50
different data collections have been put together to be searched and accessed as a unique
resource.
Apart from the Hi-Gal sub-surveys, the core resource from which most of the VIALACTEA
primary products are derived, all of the other resources were retrieved from already
public repositories or released to the VIALACTEA community but retaining their private
data policy. That's the reason why access to the VLKB infrastructure has been secured and
allowed only to the project's members.
Tables REF , REF  and REF  summarize the sub-surveys data collections reporting minimal figures for the various FITS file sets.
TABLE 
TABLE 
TABLE 
Hi-Gal data, the survey tiles listed in Table REF  as well all the data derived from them (e.g.
filaments, bubbles and single band catalogue listed in Table REF ) are private to the project.
MOPRA, GRS, NANTEN, OGS have been granted for usage inside the VIALACTEA project, but are covered by privacy
policy.
Extinction Map data are private until the end of the project because they have been produced within the
VIALACTEA project itself.
All the other data cube surveys and pointed archive listed in Table REF  and REF , are
publicly available starting from locations listed in Appendix .
All of the above files, that sum up to about 1 TB and nearly 40 000 files, are of course only the
archival resource that needs to be made discoverable, accessible and retrievable to the community to enable
the workflows and analysis that are the goal of the project.
The first, obvious, step in this direction is the ingestion of the needed metadata in a database back end to
allow faster discovery and endpoint retrieval for accessibility. This is part of the content of the next
subsection.

Database Content
Alongside the FITS data collections, a relational database (RDB) completes the VLKB resource content in terms
of data information. This RDB (using a MySQL RDBMS) contains various types and blocks of information needed
by the project. To mimic the logic underlying the project work packages subdivision, a set of schemata has
been prepared to host the information.
Filaments & Bubbles.
This database schema holds all the information related to the diffuse
objects identified from Hi-Gal continuum tiles (for filaments) and Hi-Gal and CORNISH tiles (for bubbles).
Filamentary structures are described using a set of 3 tables, identifying filaments as the
primary object, branches as the “linear” components within them and their spines, and
nodes as the connection points of the various branch segments that compose a filament.
Bubbles are described as a unique catalogue of diffuse objectS, because their roundish shape doesn't
require further relationships among their components.
Both filaments and bubbles tables are completed with positional and global details plus contour
information. This latter is represented in two ways: an ordered sequence of sky positions (i.e. a polygon
outlining the diffuse structure) and a reference to a FITS file in MOC format (Multi-Order Coverage Map
{{cite:68a0e472-46c3-49ad-9611-13eba4956814}}, an IVOA Recommendation), that is an HEALPix{{cite:9b70f7e3-64ca-4c4a-a11a-54253c8c31c2}}
tessellation of the diffuse object's area to be used for easier cross-match with other positional features
in the VLKB or other databases.
Compact Sources.
This schema contains all the single band catalogues used by the project to
build up a bandmerged catalogue of compact sources. The primary input of the band merge task
are the 5 single band catalogues derived from the Hi-Gal images through the CuTEx tool (refined as a deliverable of the VIALACTEA project).
Alongside this catalogues, other have been used to build up a multi band catalogue of the galactic compact sources. The full single band catalogue
listing includes: Hi-Gal (PACS and SPIR bands), ATLASGAL, BGPS, MIPSGAL, MSX and WISE (bands W3 and W4)
catalogues for the galactic plane. The bandmerged catalogue is produced from these ones using
data mining techniques included in the QFullTree tool delivered by the VIALACTEA project itself.
This schema includes also other content, not used in the band-merging effort of the project, but used in
the SED scenario investigated by the project. One table is devoted to the grid of synthetic protocluster
evolutionary models (based on Robitaille{{cite:adcee08e-d218-4ce4-9dd4-1090b28ec095}} models and delivered through the
project); this sums up to 20 million SED records to synthesize energy distributions in the bands used by
the band-merging effort. Another one is meant to keep track of the velocity information processed using
the radio cubes FITS and database through the Peak Finder tool developed by VIALACTEA WP3 members to be
later used in the distance estimation process of the various sources on the galactic plane.
Radio Cubes.
All the metadata information about the stored FITS files and needed for the search
and access interfaces is contained in this schema. This means, currently, all the sky frame boundaries
needed for the discovery phase plus the actual location in the storage for data processing (cutout and
merge) and retrieval.
Alongside the datasets minimal descriptions this schema includes also a table with a the description of
all the sub-surveys to let the consumer applications (currently the Visual Analytics one developed within
the project) identify the relevant sub-survey for the user.
This is probably the schema that may see more changes in the last phases of the project, if resources
allow to move to a better VO compliant scenario. In that case probably an
ObsCore{{cite:24af6ebc-7e9d-4e92-834a-c3cf746a4b22}} table may take the role of part of the current FITS datasets
meta-descriptions.
TAP_SCHEMA.
A last schema is kept in the VLKB to describe all of the schemata, tables, columns
and their keys and indexes to be deployed through the TAP interface. This is the schema that is part of
the IVOA TAP specification and acts as a counterpart to the information schema that is built in the RDBMS systems. Every change in the exposed database architecture that the VLKB wants to make visible to the user
as a description counterpart in this schema.

Table REF  summarizes the various catalogues ingested in the VLKB database part
including the number of records. Not all of the database table details have been included, because this is highly dependent on the usage and, given the project is still ongoing, they will vary a lot.
TABLE 
As for the datasets, some of these are publicly available, other are covered by a privacy policy.
Filaments and bubbles catalogues and SED models, being products of the project, are private until the end of
the project itself. Hi-Gal derived data is part of the core of the project, and thus it is also covered by
privacy policy. The other catalogues are public and available as listed in Appendix .
Please note that, since the VIALACTEA project is not yet finished and delivered, the above figures and
contents may not be exact, but anyway they give a good idea of the contents and goals of the VLKB.

VLKB INTERFACES
All the data and metadata contents described in Section  would be, of course, useless if not
somehow discoverable and accessible. This is the goal of the interfaces that have been put on top of the
database and storage system. The following subsections describe the two consuming interface systems that have
been set up for the VIALACTEA community: a TAP interface (Sec. REF ) and a set of dedicated
interfaces (Sec. REF ) to consume to stored FITS datasets.
TAP interface
The IVOA Table Access Protocol is a specification to allow generic table-sets to be deployed as VO resources.
It aims at homogenizing database access in the astrophysical research field, adding specific metadata content
for discoverability and interoperability among different resources.
The choice to have a TAP interface on top of the VLKB database part was made to allow both positional
searches (that could have been done using a Simple Cone Search{{cite:cf182ff7-bb43-4ce6-9629-17296165a69f}} protocol) and
generic searches through the fields of the ingested data, also considering cross correlations between
multiple tables available through the service.
The TAP service has been deployed using the IA2 TAP implementationIA2TAP is part of the IA2 Data Access Layer service generation tools:
http://www.ia2.inaf.it/vo-services/vo-dance. It runs inside a GlassFish JAVA EE web container and it
has been developed on top of the openCADChttps://github.com/opencadc libraries by the Canadian
Astronomy Data Centerhttp://www.cadc-ccda.hia-iha.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/en/.
Since the data ingested in the database is partly public and partly private data, the access to the interface
has been secured. The authentication mechanism is currently being re-shaped to allow single user access (as
opposite to the current project membership credentials), also in view of the user space related to the output
products of the cutout and merge services described hereafter.
The TAP service, in short, serves everything included in the filaments, bubbles, compact sources, sed_models
and velocity peak store resource span and, in the future, it is intended to support also the radio cubes and
images metadata. The visualization tool developed within the VIALACTEA project consumes this TAP service to
provide the user with the relevant information to display alongside images and cubes.

Discovery, Cutout & Merge interfaces
While the TAP interface is useful for generic tabular access, it is less powerful (at least alone) to perform
positional discovery and is not designed to provide direct access to data files (unless one is willing only
to retrieve a full file).
However, the requirements of the project were also to be able to:

identify what files' content overlap a region along a specific line of sight on the celestial sphere
and described by a circle or a rectangular range around it;

cutout the files on positional constraints and also on the velocity axis (if 3D cubes were
investigated) to allow for efficient data transport on the net and work only on the relevant part of data;

merge adjacent files (from the same sub-survey, i.e. no information post-processing during the merge
phase) into a single image/cube based on positional and velocity bounds.

IVOA specifications are currently covering the second point (see SODASODA Proposed Recommendation
http://www.ivoa.net/documents/SODA/index.html), were in the phase of describing the first one when the
VIALACTEA project was kicked-off (the SIAv2{{cite:dbe9284b-8a93-4ca3-890f-caa65a8a1508}} protocol) and foresee the third one in
the near future (probably a minor revision of SODA).
Thus, even if keeping an eye on what IVOA was providing, a custom solution was undertook to have the
discovery and access interfaces for VIALACTEA in place. This custom solution allowed also to work directly in
galactic coordinates, while in the IVOA interfaces equatorial coordinates are prioritized.
The developed interface architecture is now composed of three services that share the same parametric query
solution for positions, bound descriptions, sub-survey selection and are able to search and cutout
indifferently of the underlying FITS header metadata (at least as far the WCS{{cite:2551ba08-7ca1-449a-a493-89119b22ff84}}, {{cite:41e3a89d-2f0d-46cc-8fbc-fa16a612f359}} descriptors are correctly in
place and understood by the ASThttp://starlink.eao.hawaii.edu/starlink/AST libraries).
Specifically, the headers of various sub-surveys are passed to
AST{{cite:b45f57ec-38ea-43c3-93b7-789e147e29e5}} library which is used to perform region overlap,
and boundary computations. The AST library is a C-library so the JNI technology is used to access
C-code from Java domain. Most of the Java-code is performing interfacing. Essential work is done "below" JNI in C.
We process the partial results from AST in C-domain and then return the final results to Java domain.
So we cross the JNI once per request.
Similar approach is taken also for the merge service, where the used engine is
Montagehttp://montage.ipac.caltech.edu/. The merging service internally adds 3D-datacubes
which are the result of the cutout service.
Issues on header metadata content as been solved, as far as possible, through corrected information ingestion
at database level, trying not to change the original retrieved FITS, especially in the case of mirroring pre-
existing resources. Data content of the FITS files also has been kept to a minimum, untouched in the cutout
service, at most regridded along the third axis in the merge service if the adjacent FITS had different
binning on that axis.
The set of three services, secured like the TAP interface to prevent unauthorized access to private data,
deploys to the project's members all the images, cubes and extinction maps summarized in Tables 
REF , REF  and REF . The VIALACTEA visualization tool as well as other
task tools make use of these services endpoints to prepare the input data for their tasks.

PLANNED VLKB SETUP
FIGURE 
The data resources described in Section  and the interfaces reported in the previous
Section  build up what was the goal of the VIALACTEA Work Package 5 Task 1.
Currently the development is in finalization, but all what as been reported is planned to be ready and
consumable by the end of September 2016 (i.e. the end of the funded project). Figure REF 
gives a quick view of the architecture of the full system.
Depending mainly on time resource availability, more efficient discovery and access solutions, based on a
modular and distributed architecture, may be set in place and a better VO compliance can be achieved.
One major point, not detailed in this paper, but planned to be ready by the end of the project, is the
improvement of positional searches with the usage of HEALPix tessellation, in particular a dedicated service
should be set up to allow direct, quick, cross match on positions between diffuse objects (filaments and
bubbles) and compact sources. Given the large amount of records in the DB, this would be a welcome addition
to the available interfaces.
Also planned is the change from a membership-wide user to a single-based user authentication. This as the
goal also to help maintain the staging area for the cutout and merged FITS outputs of the access
interfaces, that otherwise may grow indefinitely and with no choice, for the user, to retrieve a product
already calculated.

CONCLUSIONS
Building a data infrastructure to cover large part of the radio data for the galactic plane has been quite a
big challenge, especially if undertaken with minimal resources and trying to cope with the short schedule of
a three-year project with frequently updated requirements.
In this view the VLKB development has profited from the knowledge and experience available at the INAF IA2
data center, not last the VO experience that was highly useful in defining the solutions for discovery and
access to the data, even if not directly available in terms of IVOA Recommendations.
One main critic that may be addressed to the solutions put in place is that large part of the data has been
mirrored in a single location to be again deployed to the community. Indeed, initially the idea was to build
as much as possible over existing resources and services; however most of the data re-used fell behind custom
interfaces, usually graphical web forms, that were difficult to access programmatically and attach to a
common interface solution.
Considering that the VIALACTEA project is now running to its final deadline, it is difficult to foresee what
improvements may be made to the VLKB, besides minimal maintenance; however, if further development and
progress were to be foreseen, for sure developing a real VO compliant architecture will be definitely of a
benefit to the community not to have future projects develop again mirrored interfaces to already existing
resources.

PUBLIC DATA
Here follows the listing of all the public data used in developing the VLKB content.
FITS cubes
Radio cubes surveys and pointed archives.
CHIMP:
http://dx.doi.org/10.11570/16.0001
CHaMP:
http://www.astro.ufl.edu/~peterb/research/champ/rbank/
HOPS:
http://awalsh.ivec.org/hops/public/data_cubes.php
ThrUMMS:
http://www.astro.ufl.edu/~peterb/research/thrumms/rbank/
JCMT-HARPS:
http://www.cadc-ccda.hia-iha.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/en/jcmt/
MALT90:
http://atoa.atnf.csiro.au/MALT90
VGPS:
http://www.ras.ucalgary.ca/VGPS/
CGPS:
http://www.ras.ucalgary.ca/CGPS/products/
SPGS:
http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/HI/sgps/queryForm.html


FITS images
Continuum surveys.
CORNISH:
http://cornish.leeds.ac.uk/public/index.php
MAGPIS:
http://third.ucllnl.org/gps/
MIPSGAL:
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/data/SPITZER/MIPSGAL/
WISE:
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/Missions/wise.html


Catalogues
Single band catalogues used in band-merging.
WISE:
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/cgi-bin/Gator/nph-dd
ATLASGAL:
http://atlasgal.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/cgi-bin/ATLASGAL_DATABASE.cgi
BGPS:
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/cgi-bin/Gator/nph-scan?submit=Select&projshort=BOLOCAM
MIPSGAL:
http://vizier.u-strasbg.fr/viz-bin/VizieR?-source=J/AJ/149/64
MSX:
http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/applications/MSX/MSX/mission.htm

This work has been developed under the European Community 7th Framework
Programme, Grant Agreement 607380, VIALACTEA - The Milky Way as a Star formation
engine.
The VLKB resource data and metadata are highly depending on external public and private sources. We
acknowledge the efforts of the staff of the primary repositories and archives from which we retrieved
the data to be offered to the VIALACTEA members and, at the end of the project, to the astrophysical
community (all the relevant starting points are listed in Appendix ).
This research made use of Montage. It is funded by the National Science Foundation under Grant Number
ACI-1440620, and was previously funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Earth
Science Technology Office, Computation Technologies Project, under Cooperative Agreement Number
NCC5-626 between NASA and the California Institute of Technology.
