
X-RED: A Satellite Mission Concept To Detect
Early Universe Gamma Ray Bursts
Mirko Krumpea, Deirdre Coffeyb, Georg Eggerc,
Francesc Vilardelld, Karolien Lefevere, Adriane Liermannf,
Agnes I.D. Hoffmanng, Jörg Steiperh, Marc Cherixi,
Simon Albrechtj, Pedro Russok, Thomas Strodll,
Rurik Wahlinm, Pieter Derooe, Arvind Parmarn,
Niels Lundo, and Günther Hasingerp
aAstrophysikalisches Institut Potsdam, An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany;
bThe Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, 5 Merrion Square, Dublin 2, Ireland;
cInstitute for Communication Networks and Satellite Communications,
Graz University of Technology, Inffeldgasse 12, A-8010 Graz, Austria;
dUniversitat de Barcelona, C/ Martí i Franquès 1, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain;
eInstituut voor Sterrenkunde, Celestijnenlaan 200B, 3001 Leuven, Belgium;
fUniversität Potsdam, Institut für Physik, Astrophysik, Am Neuen Palais 10,
D-14469 Potsdam, Germany;
gInstitut für Astronomie und Astrophysik, Universität Tübingen, Sand 1,
D-72076 Tübingen, Germany;
hInstitut für Astrophysik, Universität Göttingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1,
D-37077 Göttingen, Germany;
iObservatoire de Genève, Chemin des Maillettes 51, CH-1290 Sauverny, Suisse;
jLeiden Observatory, P.O. Box 9513, NL-2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands;
kFaculty of Sciences - University of Porto, And Navegar Foundation, Av.24 no800,
4500 - 202 Espinho, Portugal;
lTechnische Universität Wien, Karlsplatz 13, A-1040 Wien, Austria;
mDepartment of Astronomy and Space Physics, Uppsala University, Box 515,
SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden;
nResearch and Scientific Support Dept. of the European Space Agency, ESTEC, Keplerlaan 1,
2200 AG Noordwijk, The Netherlands;
oDanish National Space Center, Juliane Maries Vej 30, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark;
pMax-Planck-Institut für extraterrestrische Physik, Giessenbachstrasse, Postfach 1312,
D-85741 Garching, Germany;

Further author information: (Send correspondence to M. Krumpe)
M. Krumpe: E-mail: mkrumpe@aip.de, Telephone: +49 331 7499 328
published in: Journal: Photonics for Space Environments X. Edited by Taylor,
Edward W. Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 58981J, (2005).
(c) 2005: SPIE–The International Society for Optical Engineering
Gamma ray bursts (GRBs) are the most energetic eruptions known in the
Universe. Instruments such as Compton-GRO/BATSE and the GRB
monitor on BeppoSAX have detected more than 2700 GRBs and, although
observational confirmation is still required, it is now generally
accepted that many of these bursts are associated with the collapse
of rapidly spinning massive stars to form black holes.
Consequently, since first generation stars are expected to
be very massive, GRBs are likely to have occurred in significant numbers
at early epochs. X-red is a space mission concept designed to detect
these extremely high redshifted GRBs, in order to probe the nature of the
first generation of stars and hence the time of reionisation of the early
Universe. We demonstrate that the gamma and x-ray luminosities of typical
GRBs render them detectable up to extremely high redshifts (FORMULA ),
but that current missions such as HETE2 and SWIFT operate
outside the observational range for detection of high redshift GRB
afterglows. Therefore, to redress this, we present a complete mission
design from the science case to the mission architecture and payload,
the latter comprising three instruments, namely wide field x-ray
cameras to detect high redshift gamma-rays, an x-ray focussing telescope
to determine accurate coordinates and extract spectra, and an infrared
spectrograph to observe the high redshift optical afterglow. The mission
is expected to detect and identify for the first time GRBs with FORMULA ,
thereby providing constraints on properties of the first generation of
stars and the history of the early Universe.
GRB, first generation stars, space mission, Pop III
INTRODUCTION
Before the launch of BeppoSAX in 1996, Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) were known only as explosive sources of gamma
photons, without an identified counterpart in any other part of the spectrum. Subsequently, progress included
the explanation of both temporal and spectral variations of the afterglow. However, although thousands of GRBs
have now been discovered and observed, a large fraction remain unobserved at other wavelengths. The paucity of
observations, poor positional accuracy and low photon fluxes have been important limiting factors.
BATSE-observations of more than 1 500 GRBs revealed two classes according to duration {{cite:39af874b-0182-4fd8-bc56-b682f7637e6c}}.
GRB progenitor theory predicts that the class with the longest duration (FORMULA  20 to 100 s) is due to the
collapse of massive stars {{cite:8f661ebe-1874-4a48-9e33-989f21056bbc}}, {{cite:cf2db51c-2bb4-4771-8bd6-eaea13986888}}, and are detectable up to very large
redshifts. For this class, Galama et al. (1998) {{cite:9a4dfda4-2a49-4ffa-be24-a45a956f86ae}} provides strong evidence for a physical
relation between GRBs and supernovae, which can be further classed as faint, low energy supernovae or bright,
energetic ones {{cite:d05a53bf-ecc9-42e7-8d37-5c6771c18405}}. The latter, so called hypernovae, are associated with the death of fast
rotating, massive stars {{cite:ad68a7a7-e742-4d1d-9906-079d76c4dc40}}. Consequently, since early generations of stars are expected
to
be very massive and fast rotators {{cite:f5df4201-02bf-4c45-8da0-b73e4feb15d6}}, {{cite:385d1b60-2967-473c-b67d-69403a622b8a}}, {{cite:7593ad20-2926-4e43-9f16-2a6c05469410}},[10],
{{cite:d45006b2-8546-44ed-ac7c-69e57c1e7e32}}, GRBs are likely to have occurred in significant numbers at early epochs. Therefore, they
are being increasingly recognized as potentially powerful probes of the very high redshift Universe
{{cite:f40340d4-dd00-43ca-b61d-8a49809621cf}}.
Although several space missions have been launched to study GRBs (e.g. HETE2, INTEGRAL and SWIFT), extremely
high redshift GRBs are likely to remain undetected/unidentified because their afterglow signatures are outside
the observational range of current space missions. Only GRBs up to redshifts of zFORMULA 6 can be observed by
their optical instruments. However, luminosities of typical bursts render them detectable even as far as
z FORMULA  10 to 30 {{cite:cd1a5933-2ac1-406c-bdb6-c40d492e36b9}}. For this reason, we propose a space mission, X-red, dedicated
specifically to finding early Universe GRBs. Such bursts (z FORMULA 10 to 30) will be redshifted into the
x-ray region, with optical afterglows redshifted into the infrared region. This work is based on a preliminary
mission study conducted by these authors at the ESA summer school on the “Birth, Life, and Death of Stars”
at Alpbach, Austria, in 2004. X-red is designed as an ESA project, to be launch between
2012 and 2020, and is planned as a 3 year mission, with the possibility of extension up to 10 years.

Observable Science Data
In the following, we examine the feasibility of detecting high redshift GRBs in terms of both statistical
number of detections and also adequate flux levels at x-ray and infrared wavelengths. The results dictate the
demands on instrumentation described in Section . Observations described in the literature
of the Universe at redshifts (z FORMULA 0 to 5) allowed us to use three important assumptions: GRBs are
produced by hypernovae, GRBs have the same properties in the early Universe as they do today; and finally,
flux extrapolation is possible to high redshifts. However, we are aware that there are several theories about
the early Universe (z FORMULA 5 to 30) that predict even higher GRB frequencies and fluxes. Therefore, it
should be noted that our assumptions constitute a worst case scenario.
We can gauge the expected number of detectable GRBs from the detection rate of SWIFT {{cite:6eb9fc64-133e-4b57-bf0e-94a2b39442ec}}
combined with our chosen instrument field of view (FOV) and sensitivity, Section REF . The detection
rate of X-red is therefore estimated from Fig. 3 of Hartmann et al. (2004) {{cite:7dd8bc17-111d-451a-8948-51fe96aca65b}},
given the higher sensitivity of X-red compared to SWIFT. The total number is
expected to be on the order of 800 detections over the 3 year mission lifetime. Of these detections, around
10 % are expected to be from GRBs at z FORMULA 5 (i.e. at least 80 GRBs at a distance beyond which GRBs have
not yet been observed) while 2 % (i.e. FORMULA 15 detections) are expected to be from GRBs at z FORMULA 10.
For high redshifted GRBs (z FORMULA  10) the peak energy output of 100 keV to 600 keV is shifted into the x-ray
regime. The observed luminosities span a few orders of magnitude, but tend to higher values at higher
redshifts
{{cite:884f2dd1-6647-4036-8084-1fab15ea2fe4}}. At z FORMULA  10, the expected luminosities are a few times
10FORMULA -10FORMULA  erg cmFORMULA  sFORMULA . The expected photon number at a given energy in the GRB spectrum
by Meegan (1998) {{cite:f1629db4-17d5-4708-b7ef-7c3a5eed5b14}} was integrated over the appropriate energy range. Additionally, due to the
time dilatation, the GRB is extended to z+1, and so a burst that lasts for FORMULA  10 s will be observable
for FORMULA  100 s. This provides the time constraint within which the spacecraft must point its follow-up
instruments. Unfortunately, however, the time dilatation also causes a decrease in the flux rate of high
redshifted GRBs. Figure REF , left panel, takes that into account and shows the calculated flux
distribution assuming a luminosity of 10FORMULA  erg cmFORMULA  sFORMULA .
FIGURE 
       
FIGURE 
Expected peak emission and afterglow fluxes of GRBs.
Left panel: Prompt emission photon flux from GRBs at various redshifts.
Right panel: Best-fit spectral flux distribution of the afterglow of GRB970228 from {{cite:cd1a5933-2ac1-406c-bdb6-c40d492e36b9}}.

Although the number of photons increases at lower energy bins, so too does the diffuse x-ray background.
Therefore, the FOV must be limited in order to detect the GRB above the background. The x-ray afterglow is one
to two orders of magnitude lower than the actual burst {{cite:94132db4-8fd3-4513-8637-d826b2390119}}. Therefore, a focussing
x-ray telescope is needed to study x-ray afterglows, or even late x-ray bursts, taking place several minutes
after the prompt emission {{cite:5f800eb2-0a3b-4a5a-844c-8058cad6bf9f}}. X-ray focusing telescopes work in an energy range of 0.1-12 keV.
Therefore, a possible absorption due to photo-ionization, which is highest at low energies and drops with the
third power of energy, is now investigated. In X-red's observation field, near the galactic poles,
the hydrogen number density is NFORMULA  = 10FORMULA cmFORMULA  {{cite:7532030f-05f1-4669-ae3e-20ea7fcf4ad3}}. According to
Wilms et al. (2000) {{cite:6a0458e4-4987-4f69-805f-9d7a147d5b9e}} the absorption at 0.1 keV is 4 % and decreases fast with energy.
Thus, absorption is negligible.
In the infrared wavelength range, the dimming of the afterglow, redshifting, and time dilatation nearly cancel
one another out {{cite:cd1a5933-2ac1-406c-bdb6-c40d492e36b9}}. The extinction at high redshifts is likely to be small because of the rapid
decrease in metallicity beyond zFORMULA 3. Figure REF , right panel, shows the time dependant
decrease of afterglow flux. It can be extrapolated to a short time after the burst (Table REF ) and
specifies the demands on the infrared telescope.

 TABLE
Extrapolated afterglow fluxes in the K band


Instrumentation
The main objective of X-red is to detect a reasonable number of high-redshifted GRBs with a high
positional accuracy. To achieve this objective, the satellite will be equipt with three types of instrument
(see layout in Figure REF , left panel). Four Wide Field Cameras (WFCs) operating at x-ray
wavelengths will detect high redshift gamma-rays and obtain rough coordinates. The X-ray Focussing Telescope
(XFT) will perform imaging observations to improve coordinate accuracy, and will also extract x-ray spectra
from which redshifts may be determined. The InfraRed Telescope (IRT) will extract near infrared spectra of the
high redshift afterglow.
FIGURE 
           
FIGURE 
Left panel: Layout of the three different instrument types on board the X-red
satellite.
Right panel: Field of view of the four WFCs. The radial axis is pointing towards the Sun.

Wide Field X-ray Cameras
WFCs operating at x-ray wavelengths will detect high redshift gamma-rays and obtain rough coordinates. The
only instruments currently available for observing a large FOV in the x-ray region are coded mask detectors.
Each WFC consists of a coded mask placed 1.67 m above the detector plane
by a rigid composite structure. The coded masks, e.g. {{cite:e9c612bd-99e0-4e36-86ef-6138e4d2b8a3}} of FORMULA  mm
(LFORMULA WFORMULA H) lead pieces, were
designed to cover the whole available surface of the service module.
The
dimensions of the satellite structure and the sun shield put engineering
constraints on the design and placement of the WFCs. For this reason, there are
two pairs of masks (see Figure REF , left panel). The two masks closer to the Sun are
symmetric, have a maximum size of FORMULA  m and have almost 160 000 elements each (with FORMULA %
of them transparent to
x-rays). The two masks on the further side from the Sun, also symmetric, have a
maximum size of FORMULA  m and over 161 000 elements each.
The two main problems posed by detectors covered by coded masks are the background photon noise level and the
lack of collimation in photons reaching the detector itself. Since X-red requires not only a large
FOV but high sensitivity (see Section ), these difficulties must be overcome. To overcome the
background photon noise, a combination of four WFCs is used, with each WFC surrounded by a shield. More
importantly, it is now possible to avail of the Depleted Field Effect Transistor (DEPFET) detector technology,
a new CCD technology with hybrid soft and hard x-ray detection and high speed individual pixel readout,
currently in development for the XEUS mission. This technology allows considerable improvement in background
noise reduction, see below. (The lack of flux collimation is addressed by the XFT design, Section REF .)
Each WFC is equipped with two 70FORMULA 70 cm detectors, covering an energy range between 0.1 keV and
100 keV. A 70FORMULA 70 cm Depleted Field Effect Transistor (DEPFET) is placed in front of a 70FORMULA 70 cm
cadmium telluride (CdTe) detector, such that hard and soft x-ray detection is possible (see {{cite:cc12dbfd-4b7f-49b4-b685-8bf32e142db0}}
for a complete explanation of DEPFET and CdTe detectors). The two detectors can be used to trace the photon's
path. By knowing the detection position in both detectors, it is possible to eliminate background photons.
Hence, the background photon noise can be reduced even further.

 TABLE
Estimated properties for the WFCs detectors.

High redshifted GRBs (FORMULA ) are fainter than medium redshifted GRBs
(FORMULA ). Coded mask instrument sensitivity increases with the size of
the detectors. According to the expected fluxes,
all detectors have been designed large enough to be able to detect a typical GRB
at FORMULA  within their energy range. The large detector dimensions and the number and size of the pixels (see
Table REF ) may be considered ambitious. However, it is expected that technological advances are
likely to meet this demand by the planned launch date of X-red.
Overall, with this configuration, the total FOV of the four WFCs (which have coded masks of 50 %
transparency) is 0.6 steradians (FORMULA , Figure REF ,
right panel), and the positional accuracy is FORMULA  1 arcmin (FWHM FORMULA  6 arcmin), as determined by the
mask-to-detector distance, the size of the mask elements and the detector pixels.

X-Ray Focussing Telescope
The second x-ray instrument on-board is the XFT, which will perform imaging observations to improve coordinate
accuracy, and will also extract x-ray spectra from which redshifts may be determined.
With this instrument, we can overcome the second difficulty posed by the WFC coded mask (mentioned in
Section REF ), i.e. the lack of collimation in photons reaching the detector.
X-ray grazing incidence mirrors are able to focus x-rays but only under very small reflection angles and, with
increasing photon energy, the angle becomes even smaller. This results in the typically large focal lengths of
x-ray telescopes. Meanwhile, the dimensions of the fairing (Section REF ) and moment of
inertia considerations (Section REF ) impose a limit on the available focal length for the XFT of
5.5 m, with corresponding radius 0.28 m (scaling a XMM-Newton type telescope). We must look to new
technologies to ensure adequate sensitivity under these focal length and radius restrictions.
Silicon High-Precision Pore Optics (Si-HPO, or simply `pore optics') is another challenging new technology
currently in development for the XEUS mission (as is DEPFET, Section REF ). Although the constraint
on maximum tolerable graze angle for pore optics is the same as for conventional mirrors, pore optics can be
made to more efficiently fill the aperture of the telescope. This means it is possible to obtain a given
effective mirror area with a telescope of smaller opening. This in turn translates to a shorter focal length.
So the use of pore optics will not only have the effect of drastically decreasing the mass of the mirrors
since it is very light-weight, but will increase the effective area substantially. With our chosen design, a
pore optics telescope will have an effective area of 1 400 cmFORMULA  @ 1.5 keV, which is 12 times better
than SWIFT {{cite:2522c004-6a28-4cd8-8064-334ec02efaf0}}, {{cite:0e1b20d6-c65d-433c-8c03-620692399eeb}}.
Having collimated the photons, we then choose to implement a photon counting intrinsic energy resolution
detector. As with the WFCs, we use DEPFET detector technology of FORMULA  with
FORMULA  pixel. The detector will be read out every 1 ms in window mode (i.e. only partial detector
read-out according to GRB location, resulting in increased speed and hence allowing photon energy resolution).
The observational data will yield both x-ray images and spectra. Given a FOV of 10 arcmin a GRB
position accuracy of 1 arcsec is feasible. Further technical details are listed in Table REF .
From the x-ray spectrum, we can identify emission and/or absorption lines which allow determination of the
redshift.

 TABLE
Technical details for the XFT.tab:XPTdata


Infrared Telescope
The IRT is intended to extract spectra of the high redshift optical afterglow. The demands on the IRT are
dictated by the nature of high redshifted afterglows of GRBs. These events are limited in lifetime (days to
months) and the flux is continuously decreasing rapidly, so it is crutial to obtain a spectrum as soon as
possible.
In the majority of GRB afterglows, Lyman-FORMULA  is the most distinctive absorption line {{cite:195480c8-a565-4a12-bebc-0d3471ce70ea}}
and is detectable even with low-resolution spectroscopy and in a noisy spectra. Even though other emission
and/or absorption lines are recognized in afterglows, we expect Lyman-FORMULA  to be the most prominent line
from the first generation of stars, due to their chemical composition. At a redshift of FORMULA 5 to 15 or
even up to zFORMULA 20, Lyman-FORMULA  is shifted into the near infrared
(FORMULA  FORMULA  0.73 to 1.95 FORMULA m, or even 2.55 FORMULA m). However, for clear determination of
the redshift, detection of other features is also desirable. Hence, the detector's wavelength range should
exceed FORMULA m. For an adequate signal-to-noise ratio, our choice of detector must operate at
FORMULA 35 K. The corresponding demand on thermal design puts strong constraints on the telescope, the detector
and the whole spacecraft. Active cooling systems have the disadvantage that they limit the lifetime of the
mission significantly and increase the spacecraft's mass substantially. Passive cooling to 35 K is an
engineering challenge but it is absolutely desired, and possible if the complete satellite architecture is
designed according to this requirement (Section REF ).
Considering the required spectral range and the feasibility of passive cooling, the Near Infrared Spectrograph
(NIRSpec) of the James Webb Space Telescope can serve as a basis for the detector design
{{cite:8173d4bd-6f61-4981-8278-831a7dee2164}}. This operates in the wavelength range of 0.6 to 5.0 FORMULA m and offers a range of
resolutions (R = 100 - 3 000). Given that afterglow fluxes decrease rapidly over time, high resolution
spectroscopy is not possible since the photon rates are low and space-based mirrors are too small. However,
for determination of redshift, low resolution spectroscopy is sufficient. Therefore, we propose a modified
NIRSpec with a "low" resolution mode of R FORMULA  30 and a "high" resolution mode of R FORMULA  100. For a
telescope diameter of 0.85 m the required minimum near infrared fluxes for a 10 FORMULA  event corresponds
to 8.6 (or 28.5) mJy (by scaling NIRSpec) at a given resolution of R FORMULA  30 (or R FORMULA  100).

 TABLE
Estimated properties for the IRT and the infrared detector.


Mission Architecture
Orbit & Launcher
The spacecraft orbit was chosen as the Lagrangian point, L2, where gravitational pull and centripetal force
between Sun and Earth are equal. This location will provide long term uninterrupted observations of GRBs and
their afterglows with the XFT and IRT, which would not be achieveable from an Earth orbit. The location will
also avoid eclipses, giving a stable thermal environment.
Thanks to the advanced light-weight instrument technology (Section ) and choice of
light-weight passive cooling (Section REF ), the mass loading is minimised and so we can choose
the cheaper Soyuz launcher, which imposes a lower mass constraint than the more expensive Ariane 5. This choice also,
however, gives some limiting constraints to the total dimensions of the spacecraft. It will be equipt with the
new ST fairing (offering larger dimensions for a bigger payload). The internal dimensions of this fairing are
FORMULA 3.8 m in diameter and FORMULA 9.5 m in height, but forming a cone at the top which
leaves an effective height H FORMULAFORMULA  6 m for the basic 3.6 m diameter cylindrical shape. A Fregat module, which
provides the final injection to L2, is included in the fairing.
It is expected that the Soyuz–Fregat spacecraft will be launched from the European Spaceport in Korou. The
Soyuz will bring the spacecraft to an intermediate orbit around Earth at which point the Fregat module then
performs the injection to the transfer orbit, including a fly-by maneuver with the moon, until it finally
reaches L2. Upon arrival, the spacecraft will perform a halo–orbit about the instable L2 point, with a total
amplitude of FORMULA  m.

Propulsion
In order to correct the flight trajectory to L2, and to maintain stability about the instable L2 point, a
propulsion system will be included in the spacecraft. Additionally, this will serve to offload the momentum
wheels (Section REF ), which are included in the spacecraft for pointing manoeuvres. Required
trajectory corrections of 50 m sFORMULA  and stability corrections of 2 m sFORMULA  yrFORMULA  are expected.
Estimating an extended maximum lifetime of 10 years for the mission, the sum of all corrections is
FORMULA  70 m sFORMULA .
The thruster propellant chosen is hydrazine (NFORMULA HFORMULA ), for its high specific impulse (IFORMULA  FORMULA  230 s)
compared to a liquid gas like nitrogen (IFORMULA  FORMULA  70 s). Electrical thrusters (IFORMULA  FORMULA  1 000 s) do
exist but they require a stable high voltage supply and a non-standard power processing unit, the mass of
which increases with specific impulse. Also, they offer best performance for long thrust periods, and so are not
required for this mission. Furthermore, structure and mass constraints preclude electrical thrusters.
Therefore, hydrazine thrusters are favoured, as their high specfic impulse means lower fuel mass rendering them more
suitable for longer duration missions. In addition to the propellant mass, the specifications for the
thrusters, pipes and valves have to be considered. For the expected requirements, a system of 16 thrusters
each providing a force of 10 N is deemed sufficient. The propellant will be stored in two tanks situated in the service
module. The mass estimated for a total lifetime of 10 years is FORMULA  70 kg, and is broken down as follows:
propellant FORMULA 50 kg; tanks (2FORMULA 6 kg) FORMULA 12 kg; thrusters (16FORMULA 0.3 kg) FORMULA 4.8 kg;
pipes and valves FORMULA 3 kg.

Attitude Control
Since using thrusters for the attitude control would add extra propellant mass and exceed the mass limitations
of the spacecraft, we choose instead a four momentum wheel system (for redundancy purposes) orientied in
a tetrahedron to control the rotation of the spacecraft. This attitude control system will
include two star trackers, with a positional accuracy of 0.25 arcsec (FWHMFORMULA 1.0 arcsec), pointing parallel to the
XFT – IRT alignment. The spacecraft is of effective height HFORMULA  FORMULA  6 m (Section REF ) and of
mass m FORMULA  1 500 kg (Section ). Assuming a cylindrical geometry, the satellite's
highest possible rotational moment of inertia, FORMULA , (i.e. about the x or y axis, see
Figure REF ) was estimated by
FORMULA 
where R is the spacecraft radius and HFORMULA  is the height of the center of mass of the cylinder
(HFORMULA =FORMULA  HFORMULA -HFORMULA , see Section REF ). The first term represents a
rotation around the center of the cylinder. The second term is a correction term, using Steiner's law, to
account for the distance offset between the center of the cylinder and its center of mass, since the center of
mass is located between the service module (SM) and payload module (PM) (Figure REF , left
panel). The resulting moment of inertia is FORMULA  FORMULA  9 100 kg mFORMULA . Since the momentum wheels must slew
the satellite to any point in the FOV of the WFCs within 60 seconds, an angular speed of
FORMULA 0.01 rad sFORMULA  must be achieved. Therefore, the momentum wheels are required to store an angular
momentum of 91 N m s.
 TABLE

Specifications of the momentum wheels (based on
http://www.vfct.com/satellites/wheels)


Spacecraft Engineering
The spacecraft is divided into two parts: the service module (SM) and the payload module (PM)
(Figure REF , left panel). The PM carries all the scientific instruments, the communication
antenna, star trackers, sun shields and passive cooling radiators. The SM includes all the
devices necessary for housekeeping, attitude control, propulsion system, etc. The solar panels are mounted on
the side facing the Sun (chequered areas in Figure REF (a). The back side is equipped with
black painted radiatiors (Figure REF (b)). Finally, due to its comparatively long focal length, the XFT
necessarily extends into the SM.
General considerations in spacecraft engineering include the structure and thermal design. The structure must provide the
stiffness necessary to survive the launch, and to assure pointing accuracy during the mission. The thermal design must
ensure the instruments
are shielded from solar radiation, since they need to be kept at certain operational temperatures.
Rather than choosing a cylindrical shape, an octagonal structure for the spacecraft was chosen for ease of design
(particularily regarding the solar panels) and cost efficiency. Lastly, the surface of the spacecraft has to
be electrically conductive, avoiding potential differences that could cause discharges and damage to the
devices on-board.
FIGURE 
              
FIGURE 
Geometry of the spacecraft. Left Panel: The geometry of the division into SM and PM
(FORMULA =4.5 m, FORMULA =1.5 m). Right Panel: The geometry of the sun-facing front (a)
and dark rear (b) of the SM (FORMULA =1.8 m, FORMULA =1.34 m).

Power Systems
The major components of the power systems consist of solar arrays, storage batteries, a power regulator system
and a power distribution system. In this section we will focus on the main power source, the solar arrays. The
orbit for X-red around L2 will avoid eclipses, thus the solar arrays are a reliable source of power.
However, storage batteries must be included as well, in order to provide peak power to the spacecraft and
also as a backup power source for possible emergency scenarios. To design the solar arrays, the power
requirements of the different subsystems were estimated (Table REF ).
 TABLE
Estimated power requirements

FIGURE 
Required and obtained electrical power from the solar panels.



The power loss from the solar arrays to the loads is expressed by the supply efficiency FORMULA  FORMULA  0.85,
while further degradations (design and assembly inefficiencies, degradations due to non-optimal temperature of
the array and inherent degradation) add up to a deployment efficiency FORMULA  FORMULA  0.55 {{cite:edaaea6f-bf3b-4397-bea7-fb0511e4acb1}}. To
fulfil the power requirements, highly efficient solar arrays are mounted on the SM. A product from Spectrolab
was chosen, for illustration. The Ultra Triple Junction (UTJ) Solar Cells have a minimum average efficiency at
the beginning of life (BOL) of FORMULA  = 28 % and at the end of life (EOL)
FORMULA  = 24.3 %. The solar radiation density (solar constant) at the L2 orbit (i.e. at a distance
of 1 AU + 1.5 FORMULA  10FORMULA  m from the sun) is FORMULA . The power output from
a solar cell at the EOL (worst case) is then controlled by the following relationship:
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the solar zenith angle (i.e. the angle between the normal vector of the area and the solar rays) and FORMULA 
is the area of the cells. By simple considerations, the required area amounts to 3.5 mFORMULA . However, since our spacecraft
is octagonal and our
spacecraft is designed to rotate by FORMULA  about the x and/or y axis (implying that sides facing the sun always have different solar zenith angles), a more sophisticated approach is desirable. A
simulation program was written to study in detail the impact of rotation on power generation and thermal
aspects. As a result of the geometry of the SM, the total area of the solar panels is FORMULA .
Figure REF  illustrates that the chosen area guarantees the required electric
power even given EOL and low light conditions.

Thermal design
When faced with a long mission duration and mass limitations, passive cooling becomes imperative. The primary
engineering challenge is the cooling of the IRT, which will operate at 35-50 K. The spacecraft will orbit around L2, thus one
side will always point towards the Sun and the other always away from it. A black
body in space will radiate according to the Stefan Boltzmann fourth power law, and will absorb the incident solar
radiation FORMULA :
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the emittance, FORMULA  is the absorptance, and FORMULA  is the Stefan-Boltzmann
constant equal to FORMULA  {{cite:04b5a73a-6ac4-43f0-bcdf-beb41f2dcc27}}. Choosing materials with
the right absorptance and emittance properties is crucial. The sum of the absorbed power and dissipated power should not
exceed the radiated power. A spacecraft in thermal equilibrium fulfils
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the solar constant, FORMULA  the absorptance of each face, FORMULA  the area of
each face, FORMULA  the temperature of each face and FORMULA  is the solar zenith angle of the faces. Only faces
with a solar zenith angle within FORMULA  contribute to the absorbed power.
Thermal design of the PM
The PM consists mainly of the WFCs, the XFT, the IRT, a sunshield and radiators. The 30FORMULA  cut
(Figure REF , i.e. right side is smaller than the left side) is designed to shield the
instruments from solar radiation. The XFT detector plane will reside in the SM, and so must be thermally
controlled there. The IRT has to be kept on the shaded side in order to avoid heat as much as possible, because
of its sensor temperature requirement of FORMULA  35 K. Thermal insulation has to be optimal, with a maximum
heat transfer, Q, of 1 W. The WFCs, which consume a lot of power, are kept at room temperature.
Table REF  provides an overview of the relevant instrument data.
 TABLE
Overview of instrument details relevant for thermal engineering. The area required is that
necessary to cool the instrument to the desired temperature.

Parts of the payload structure that are facing the Sun are coated with white paint (e.g. Alion products YB-71 and YB-71P
with FORMULA  FORMULA  0.12 and FORMULA  FORMULA  0.90), the back side is passively cooled by radiating areas
coated with black paint (e.g. Alion products MH216NLO and MH21-IP with FORMULA  FORMULA  0.95 and
FORMULA  FORMULA  0.90).
Therefore, the required area follows from
FORMULA 
where FORMULA  is the heat transfer for the FORMULA th area and FORMULA  the corresponding temperature.
Simulations showed that the required area for the radiators (Table REF ) does not exceed the
available area. This is of particular interest since 35 K for the IRT is difficult to achieve by passive
cooling. By using the suggested material the thermal budget yields more radiated power than absorbed power as
can be seen in Figure REF  because the white paint covers a rather big area and has a
high emittance. This fact is important because heating is always easier than cooling. By using different
materials (polished aluminium or black paint) or heaters, a more balanced thermal budget is possible. In
our analysis, we neglected detailed structures, such as the high gain communication antenna dish on the front,
which would contribute to heating rather than to cooling.
PM, surface is at 253 K  FIGURE 
     
SM, surface is at 293K  FIGURE 

Thermal PM and SM performance. The plane surface represents the emitted power,
the curved surface is
the absorbed power plus the electrically dissipated power.

Thermal design of the SM
The front face of the SM is completely covered by solar panels, which will heat up the module. The thermal
design of the SM focusses mainly on keeping the module at room temperature to guarantee a stable operating
temperature for its devices, particularly the batteries and the propellant. This is done by radiators on the
rear face. Given that there is also an instrument in the SM, the XFT, an additional radiator panel has to be
provided to keep it at the specified temperature (Table REF ). Simulations confirmed that,
within rotations of FORMULA  (about the x and/or y axis), the radiated power always exceeds the sum of
the absorbed and dissipated power (Figure REF ).
In summary, it is shown that the proposed design is feasible in providing the required thermal specifications
of all instruments and devices. The layout allows operation of the IRT in the temperature range of 35-50 K.
Calculations reveal the engineering challenge to be insulation of the IRT such that the heat transfer does not
exceed 1 W, in which case it will not be possible to allocate sufficient area for the radiators.

Telemetry
The aim of this section is to estimate the amount of data produced by the various on-board instruments, and to examine
the best way to communicate with the ground stations. The largest amount of data will undoubtedly
come from the WFCs. This is mainly due to the diffuse x-ray background, the intensity of which is estimated
as follows, {{cite:1505b478-a40b-4b4d-b9ad-70473e767462}}, {{cite:559f0283-ba86-417c-87b6-29306e53a69f}}. The number of photons in a given energy range
( cmFORMULA  steradianFORMULA  sFORMULA ) is given by:
FORMULA 
FORMULA 
Integrating over the appropriate energy range (0.1-100 keV), and multiplying by the total detector area and
FOV of the four WFCs, gives a total number of 87 000 photons sFORMULA  (assuming coded mask efficiency
FORMULA  50 %). The relevant data that needs to be stored for every photon consists of six characterising
numbers: the (x,y) position on both detectors, the x-ray energy, and the time. Since each of these will be
stored on 10 bits, it amounts to 60 bits per photon. So we expect the data rate of the 4 WFCs to be
FORMULA 5.3 Mb sFORMULA , while the XFT and IRT require comparatively negligible rates (i.e.
FORMULA 50 kb sFORMULA ). The total comes to FORMULA 5.5 Mb sFORMULA .
The large data rate leaves two alternative. The preferred scenario involves using a high-gain, steerable
antenna (HGA) in searching for GRBs. In addition to the HGA continuously transmitting WFCs data to Earth, a
medium-gain antenna (MGA) ensures minimal data transmission for housekeeping and emergency situtations. Also,
the spacecraft must be capable of storing data onboard for a limited time. Estimations show the need for a
1.2 m diameter HGA and a ground antenna diameter of 30 m. However, various restrictions have to be considered.
Currently, available ground stations cannot ensure complete ground coverage, and a steerable HGA can constrain
the observable region. However, the data rate is the main concern, even given data compression. For
other space missions, data transmission rates of almost 3 Mb sFORMULA  are under development and will be
achievable from L2 when satellite missions like GAIA {{cite:bb102026-dd08-450d-b40b-e60089bb3e99}} are launched. The alternative
scenario uses a MGA, which inevitably means onboard raw-data processing and storage. The
reduced data are transmitted to ground during a limited time interval (typically a few hours). The first
scenario is much more attractive, mainly because of the higher flexibility and real-time ground-based data
processing, but its feasibility depends on future developments mainly in antenna technology.

Mass Estimate
One of the key points to note about this mission design is the light-weight technology and feasibility of
passive cooling (which does not increase mass through fluid considerations). This allows us to choose a
smaller launcher (Section REF ), which ultimately leads to a significant reduction in overall mission costs. The
individual masses for the subsystems are roughly broken down as follows: WFCFORMULA 160 kg ; XRT FORMULA 90 kg; IRT
FORMULA 150 kg; attitude control system FORMULA 114 kg; power system & telemetry FORMULA 130 kg; structure
FORMULA 550 kg. This gives a total mass of the spacecraft within the mass limitations for a Soyuz launcher,
i.e. 1 500 kg.

Observing Strategy
Observing the sky for GRBs is the primary objective of the X-red mission. The mission design accounts for the
fact that we cannot observe in either the galactic or ecliptic planes, so as to avoid high x-ray background levels and
possible x-ray flashes unrelated to GRB events.
While the WFCs are monitoring the sky for GRBs, the WFCs data (with positional accuracy of 1 arcmin) are analyzed by the
satellite's software and are continuously transmitted to Earth in real time. The spacecraft then acts automatically on the
coordinate information, to take further data with the other instruments. However, the satellite's GRB detection software
will have a high detecting threshold, to prevent triggering by false events. Ground stations have the option to analyze
the WFCs' data, and may choose to override the satellite controls in order to study GRBs that failed to reach the
detection threshold. In this case, the total time loss would be 20 s. Whether by automatic instruction or manual
override, the satellite will slew to point the XFT and IRT on the GRB position in less than 60 s. The XFT and IRT
instruments will then observe the GRB and its afterglow. The XFT can improve the positional accuracy to within 1
arcsecond, and immediately transmit this information to Earth where ground-based telescopes may choose to begin follow-up
observations. Note, however, that thermal and power issues place restrictions on spacecraft orientation and so, following
observation of several GRBs, the spacecraft must be reorientated to a position that ensures optimal thermal and power
conditions.

Conclusions
Extremely high redshifted GRBs provide unique probes of the first generation of stars and the early Universe.
We present X-red, a complete mission design from the science case to the payload and overall mission
architecture, the objective of which is to observe these high redshift GRBs for the first time.
We have demonstrated the feasibility of detecting high redshift GRBs in terms of both statistical number of
detections and also adequate flux levels at x-ray and infrared wavelengths. The results dictated the demands
on instrumentation. We then describe the payload which comprises three instruments, namely wide field x-ray
cameras to detect high redshift gamma-rays, an x-ray focussing telescope to determine accurate coordinates and
extract spectra, and an infrared spectrograph to observe the high redshift optical afterglow. We successfully
demonstrate that our scientific objectives are achieveable when harnessing new technologies (i.e. DEPFET and pore optics),
and we successfully meet instrument accomodation and environmental demands through our mission architecture. One of the
key points to note about our overall mission design is the light-weight technology and feasibility of passive cooling.
This significant reduction in mass allows us to choose a smaller launcher, which ultimately leads to a significant
reduction in overall mission costs without compromising scientific objectives.
In the planned 3 years mission, we expect to detect and identify 15 GRBs of zFORMULA 10. These will constitute the
first observations of high redshift GRBs, and are expected to provide valuable constraints on properties of
the first generation of stars and on the history of the early Universe.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all the tutors of the 2004 ESA summer school
for their help and suggestions, our dear friend Prof. Dr.
Johannes Ortner
for a perfectly organized summer school, all professors for their
inspiring lectures, the summer school's staff, ESA and its
single national societies (DSRI, DLR, ASA, etc.) for the financial
support of the summer school and participants.
Without this help, the collaboration for this paper would not have been
possible.
Mirko Krumpe is supported by the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-
und Raumfahrt (DLR) GmbH under contract No. FKZ 50 OR 0404.

FIGURE 
X-RED

